Add Change Management and Maintenance Schedules (#1571)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/update/change-management-and-maintenance-schedules.md

disruption in the service it provides). 

Ultimately, we cannot solve the issue of problematic user workload configurations because
they are intentionally representable with Kubernetes APIs (e.g. it may be the user's actual intention to prevent a pod
from being drained, or it may be too expensive to make a workload fully HA). When confronted with 
problematic workloads, the current, fully self-managed, OpenShift update process can appear to the end-user
to be unreliable or slow. This is because the self-managed update process takes on the end-to-end responsibility
of updating the control-plane and worker-nodes. Given the automated and somewhat opaque nature of this
update, it is reasonable for users to expect that the process is hands-off and will complete in a timely 
manner regardless of their workloads.  

When this expectation is violated because of problematic user workloads, the update process is 
often called into question. For example, if an update appears stalled after 12 hours, a
user is likely to have a poor perception of the platform and open a support ticket before

> successfully diagnosing an underlying undrainable workload.

Author: We're working to simplify the experience for operations teams on several fronts:
1. [oc adm update status](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1BtVSGWaG6LD0qye9BHPU5ssnEYTGPOlhHeogFfECUnk/edit#slide=id.g25513f80e3d_0_514) which will provide a single place to find detailed status information and SOPs.
2.  Another enhancement I will be writing where node drain timeouts are an easily enabled part of a fully managed update.
3. This enhancement which:
  1. Creates the foundation for control-plane and worker-node separation which will [exploited by other oc commands](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1BtVSGWaG6LD0qye9BHPU5ssnEYTGPOlhHeogFfECUnk/edit#slide=id.g25513f80e3d_0_566) to support diverse [personas](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1BtVSGWaG6LD0qye9BHPU5ssnEYTGPOlhHeogFfECUnk/edit#slide=id.g25ab7f062ff_1_0).
  2. Makes this type of issue less disruptive. Even if a drain takes 12 hours, you don't have to sit there and watch it. When it finishes, if it is outside your maintenance schedule, your cluster will not be subject to any more disruption.

unplanned material changes, but Change Management / Maintenance Schedules introduce higher level, platform native, and more 
intuitive guard rails. For example, consider the common pattern of a gitops configured OpenShift cluster.
If a user wants to introduce a change to a MachineConfig, it is simple to merge a change to the
resource without appreciating the fact that it will trigger a rolling reboot of nodes in the cluster.

Trying to merge this change at a particular time of day and/or trying to pause and unpause a 
MachineConfigPool to limit the impact of that merge to a particular time window requires
significant forethought by the user. Even with that forethought, if an enterprise wants 
changes to only be applied during weekends, additional custom mechanics would need
to be employed to ensure the change merged during the weekend without needing someone present.

Contrast this complexity with the user setting a Change Management / Maintenance Schedule on the cluster. The user
is then free to merge configuration changes and gitops can apply those changes to OpenShift
resources, but material change to the cluster will not be initiated until a time permitted

> by the Maintenance Schedule. Users do not require special insight into the implications of

Author: Good catch. I need to make this explicit -- there is no guarantee. The schedule assures that no material change is initiated, but the state of rebooted nodes / new nodes is dependent on the profile and state of rollout. For example, in standalone, if a new release payload is targeted by the CVO, but cluster change management is paused, the CVO will not roll out machine configs which ultimately inform new nodes joining the cluster. Thus, new nodes joining the cluster will receive the old configuration.
If, however, the MCP is halfway through updating old nodes when change management is paused, new nodes joining the cluster will receive the new configuration.

> by the Maintenance Schedule. Users do not require special insight into the implications of

Reviewer: Can we make that more deterministic somehow? How hard would it be to apply a simple rule like "new nodes will always be deployed with the latest config" or "new nodes will always be deployed with a consistent configuration"?

> by the Maintenance Schedule. Users do not require special insight into the implications of

Author: > "new nodes will always be deployed with a consistent configuration"

That isn't hard. There will be a distinct moment where the MCS will start serving the new vs the old. 

> "new nodes will always be deployed with the latest config"

Since we need to implement this for multiple controllers, the safe bet is to leave that choice up to the implementation. Intuitively, any control loop can be paused, so, as written, the enhancement should be applicable across any controller. However, to provide this guarantee, we would need to say something like "no external sign of inconsistency can be visible until reconciliation is complete".

There is inherent friction with eventual consistency in that statement.

Consider the questions it raises in standalone:
- In a paused state with MachineConfig changes pending, there is a clear difference between "new" vs "old" config. Since the "new" is not incorporated into an MCP yet, new machines booted into the cluster must necessarily receive the old.
- Once the CVO unpauses and introduces a MachineConfig update, the MCP will be updated. If we pause at this point, what should a new machine receive? If you say "new", we've violated the proposed contract.
- Once the MCO has updated 75% of the machines, should it still be serving the old config? Is consistency more important than the inevitable prolonging of the update when those new nodes running old config need to be drained & rebooted? Do we start serving new config while they newish nodes are being rebooted (if we do, its possible that we will serve old config indefinitely if new machines constantly scale into and out of the cluster)?

There are detailed answers we _could_ give here that would make the standalone update process subtly more predictable. But is CAPI going to implement this contract? Would <future upstream controller>?

In short, I think all can reasonably insist upon is the ability to pause your progress towards consistency. If we try to define what the behavior of the system must be when we pause you, things get complex.

> by the Maintenance Schedule. Users do not require special insight into the implications of

Author: I can't find any documented contract for the behavior in the existing pausing primitives provided by MCP or CAPI, so I'll need to leave this for SMEs to weigh in on the what is possible here.

configuring platform resources as the top-level Maintenance Schedule control will help ensure
that potentially disruptive changes are limited to well known time windows.

#### Reducing Service Delivery Operational Tooling
Service Delivery, as part of our OpenShift Dedicated, ROSA and other offerings is keenly aware of
the issues motivating the Change Management / Maintenance Schedule concept. This is evidenced by their design
and implementation of tooling to fill the gaps in the platform the preceding sections
suggest exist.

Specifically, Service Delivery has developed UXs outside the platform which allow customers 
to define a preferred maintenance window. For example, when requesting an update, the user 
can specify the desired start time. This is honored by Service Delivery tooling (unless
there are reasons to supersede the customer's preference).

By acknowledging the need for scheduled maintenance in the platform, we reduce the need for Service
Delivery to develop and maintain custom tooling to manage the platform while 

> simultaneously reducing simplifying management for all customer facing similar challenges.

Author: I'm not an authority on its implementation, but I believe it has aspects spread across OCM, Hive, and MUO. I think the implementation would also differ for HCP.
Assuming we could take it over, it would not facilitate the separation of control-plane and worker-node updates since it only creates a window for an entire cluster update.

5. Deliver a consistent change management experience across all platforms and profiles (e.g. Standalone, ROSA, HCP).
6. Enable SRE to, when appropriate, make configuration changes on a customer cluster and have that change actually take effect only when permitted by the customer's change management preferences.
7. Do not subvert expectations of customers well served by the existing fully self-managed cluster update.
8. Ensure the architectural space for enabling different change management strategies in the future. 

### Non-Goals

1. Allowing control-plane upgrades to be paused midway through an update. Control-plane updates are relatively rapid and pausing will introduce unnecessary complexity and risk. 
2. Requiring the use of maintenance schedules for OpenShift upgrades (the changes should be compatible with various upgrade methodologies – including being manually triggered).
3. Allowing Standalone worker-nodes to upgrade to a different payload version than the control-plane (this is supported in HCP, but is not a goal for standalone).
4. Exposing maintenance schedule controls from the oc CLI. This may be a future goal but is not required by this enhancement.

> 5. Providing strict promises around the exact timing of upgrade processes. Maintenance schedules will be honored to a reasonable extent (e.g. upgrade actions will only be initiated during a window), but long-running operations may exceed the configured end of a maintenance schedule.

Author: >How far into a maintenance schedule's window will an update event trigger?

Change can be initiated up to the last instant of the permissive window. 

> if something stops the upgrade of workers to start, maybe the operator doing this work is degraded, but it then recovers

I think of the implementation as pausing and resuming the reconciliation control loop(s). So relevant operators might go degraded, but only for reasons they go degraded prior to the introduction of change management.

> 5. Providing strict promises around the exact timing of upgrade processes. Maintenance schedules will be honored to a reasonable extent (e.g. upgrade actions will only be initiated during a window), but long-running operations may exceed the configured end of a maintenance schedule.

Reviewer 2: Behavior for upgrades today is we will cancel if it takes too long to start.  Would need to find out what "too long" actually is.  We'll need to be careful about how this is communicated when we switch over to using this for managed.  More thinking about the duration for control plane upgrades.  I know we don't guarentee how long it will take, but perhaps something should consider how long those upgrades take and estimate if it would roughly fit into the "window" of the schedule.

> 5. Providing strict promises around the exact timing of upgrade processes. Maintenance schedules will be honored to a reasonable extent (e.g. upgrade actions will only be initiated during a window), but long-running operations may exceed the configured end of a maintenance schedule.

Author: Control plane averages about an hour. Are you thinking that OCM might want to prevent users from scheduling less than say, 2 hours to prevent their expectations from being violated?

> 5. Providing strict promises around the exact timing of upgrade processes. Maintenance schedules will be honored to a reasonable extent (e.g. upgrade actions will only be initiated during a window), but long-running operations may exceed the configured end of a maintenance schedule.

Reviewer 2: For control plane I wouldn't set an expectation on an end time, just allow scheduling the start.  Having an end implies an ability to stop the upgrade.  This is not the intention of this EP.

> 6. Implementing logic to defend against impractical maintenance schedules (e.g. if a customer configures a 1-second maintenance schedule every year). Service Delivery may want to implement such logic to ensure upgrade progress can be made.

Reviewer 2: If we (SD) need to put something in place to manage this it's going to mean keeping some code somewhere.  Today scheduling is via OCM.  If this enhancement is accepted this becomes a platform capbility.  We (SD) have not talked about the implications of such a feature on how we enable customer to manage upgrades.  Can we see a world where SD gets out of the business of managing schedules completely at some point in the future?  If so, having the right controls in place to ensure sane configurations will generally be a good idea.  

That being said, we only care about the version of the cluster in a few cases.
1. if the cluster version is end of life (EOL)
2. if the cluster's control plane is running on RH SRE infra

In the #1 scenario, the cluster goes into Limited Support.
In the #2 scenario, it only applys for HCP toploogies where the pods of the control plane are running on RH infrastructure.  SRE will force a control plane upgrade if the control plane version for signifigent bugs that need remediated, there is a vulnerability we need to remediate, or the control plane version is now EOL.

Author: > Can we see a world where SD gets out of the business of managing schedules completely at some point in the future?

Yes. SD could let customers fully define their own maintenance schedules and simply override them when necessary (e.g. using `disabledUntil`). The reason SD _might_ want to play a larger role in constraining the setting is to make sure, when necessary, that forced updates are performed within a customer's desired window.  Your #2 scenario, for example: you have to do the update and ideally want users to be OK with when it happens. If you force them to choose a non-zero change management window each month, hopefully they are less surprised when forced changes happen during that window.

  change management in the resource is `Disabled`. Setting a future date in `disabledUntil` offers a less invasive (i.e. no important configuration needs to be changed) method to 
  disable change management constraints (e.g. if it is critical to roll out a fix) and a method that
  does not need to be reverted (i.e. it will naturally expire after the specified date and the configured
  change management strategy will re-activate).
- `changeManagement.pausedUntil: <bool|date>`: Unless the effective active strategy is Disabled, `pausedUntil: true` or `pausedUntil: <future-date>`, change management must 
  pause material changes.

### Change Management Status
Change Management information will also be reflected in resource status. Each resource 
which contains the stanza in its `spec` will expose its current impact in its `status`. 
Common user interfaces for aggregating and displaying progress of these underlying resources
should be updated to proxy that status information to the end users.

### Change Management Metrics
Cluster wide change management information will be made available through cluster metrics. Each resource
containing the stanza should expose the following metrics:

> - The number of seconds until the next known permitted change window. 0 if changes can currently be initiated. -1 if changes are paused indefinitely. -2 if no permitted window can be computed.

Author: My motivation was to simplify the promql necessary for useful alerting by an ops team. A simple rule might be `warn "Invalid update schedule" when seconds_until_update < 0 or seconds_until_update_permitted > 60 days` vs enumerating booleans for why things might be busted. SD would certainly know best here, so I'm open to alternatives. I just want any rule to survive the introduction of new error conditions.

> - The number of seconds until the next known permitted change window. 0 if changes can currently be initiated. -1 if changes are paused indefinitely. -2 if no permitted window can be computed.

Reviewer 2: From the observability perspective it does reduce cardinality to use the value to encode the state.  As noted it will work.  It gets a bit brittle when you now have a mapping through various layers and have to know that encoded meaning in the metric value.

- Whether any change management strategy is enabled.
- Which change management strategy is enabled.
- If changes are pending due to change management controls.

### Change Management Hierarchy
Material changes to worker-nodes are constrained by change management policies in their associated resource AND 
at the control-plane resource. For example, in a standalone profile, if a MachineConfigPool's change management
configuration apparently permits material changes from being initiated at a given moment, that is only the case 
if ClusterVersion is **also** permitting changes from being initiated at that time.

The design choice is informed by a thought experiment: As a cluster lifecycle administrator for a Standalone cluster,
who wants to achieve the simple goal of ensuring no material changes take place outside a well-defined 
maintenance schedule, do you want to have to the challenge of keeping every MachineConfigPool's 
`changeManagement` stanza in perfect synchronization with the ClusterVersion's? What if a new MCP is created 
without your knowledge?
 
The hierarchical approach allows a single master change management policy to be in place across 

> both the control-plane and worker-nodes. 

Author: > It still feels a bit cumbersome to add the same scheduling info to several different resources.
It may already be clear, but just in case: the hierarchy approach is so that adding the same info to multiple resources _can_ be avoided. If an operations team for a standalone cluster wants a simple maintenance schedule, they add it to `ClusterVersion`. This controls changes to the control-plane AND worker-nodes.
If they want more complex approach, they add more specific maintenance schedule for a MCP1 and a different one for MCP2. 

If you instead mean, why can't the schedule information for all components be in the same CRD, that was an [early approach I documented](https://github.com/jupierce/oc-update-design-ideas/commit/a6364ee2f2c1ebf84ed6d50bc277f9736bf793bd) for the working group. Ultimately, it felt less intuitive across profiles. Consider a CRD called `UpdatePolicy` that tries to be a central config.
1. Is it namespaced? If it is, that feels odd for an object that that should control the cluster. If it is not namespaced, the policy feels misplaced for HCP HostedCluster resources which live in a namespace. 
2. Where does someone check the status of the policy (e.g. when the next update is going to be possible on a given MCP?). If it is the `UpdatePolicy` object, you have multiple independent controllers controlling the status, which is the start of a bad time. If the UpdatePolicy controls multiple different MCPs differently, how do they independently report their status'? It also introduces the problem of having to look at multiple places (MCP and `UpdatePolicy` to understand what may be happening.
3. As you pack policies for control-plane, MCPs, HCP primitives into an expressive `UpdatePolicy`, the schema options varied from too complex, to error prone, to overly abstract, to overly limiting. 
4. If you split the policy object up to simplify it, e.g. one for each MCP, you have the problem of associating it to the right MCP unambiguously. Planting the policy in the MCP itself solves this problem.

In summary, it possible, but I didn't consider what I came up with more elegant or user friendly than housing the policies in the resources they control.

> Alternately, what if we only had the enabled/disabled flag and left it up to an outside actor (ACM, OCM, etc.) to implement schedules? That would also open up use cases like "allow updates on Saturdays, unless service X is very busy serving traffic" via user scripting rather than requiring us to build the feature in ourselves.
I seek to expose those primitives (see `disabledUntil`, Manual, or Assisted) to allow customers to construct arbitrarily complex or simple methods for choreographing updates. 
`MaintenanceSchedule` is the OOB strategy that should serve the 80%.

> both the control-plane and worker-nodes. 

Reviewer: > In summary, it possible, but I didn't consider what I came up with more elegant or user friendly than housing the policies in the resources they control.

That all makes sense, thanks for the detailed response.

> both the control-plane and worker-nodes. 

Author: Added this discussion to the Alternative section.

1. The operations team is comfortable with the forthcoming changes.
1. The first Saturday of the month 00:00 UTC arrives. The HyperShift operator initiates the worker-node updates based on the pending changes in the cluster NodePool.
1. The HCP cluster has a large number of worker nodes and draining and rebooting them is time-consuming. 
1. At 23:59 UTC Saturday night, 80% of worker-nodes have been updated. Since the maintenance schedule still permits the initiation of material changes, another worker-node begins to be updated.
1. The update of this worker-node continues, but at 00:00 UTC Sunday, no further material changes are permitted by the change management policy and the worker-node update process is effectively paused.
1. Because not all worker-nodes have been updated, changes are still reported as pending via metrics for NodePool.  **TODO: Review with HyperShift. Pausing progress should be possible, but a metric indicating changes still pending may not since they interact only through CAPI.**
1. The HCP cluster runs with worker-nodes at mixed versions throughout the month. The N-1 skew between the old kubelet versions and control-plane is supported.

> 1. **TODO: Review with Service Delivery. If the user requested another minor bump to their control-plane, how does OCM prevent unsupported version skew today?**

Reviewer 2: We should have skew protection (whatever it's called) disabled because we'll force a minor version upgrade of control planes in ROSA HCP when the control plane version is EOL.  Validation of allowed skew is possible at other layers like OCM/CS, not sure what we permit at this time.

> 1. On the next first Saturday, the worker-nodes updates are completed.

Reviewer: This detailed workflow narrative is amazing!

   Worker-nodes must wait until the first Saturday of the month.
1. OCM (through various layers) configures the ClusterVersion and worker MachineConfigPool(s) (MCP) for the cluster with appropriate `changeManagement` stanzas.
1. Company workloads are added to the new cluster and the cluster provides value.
1. To leverage a new feature in OpenShift, the service consumer plans to update the minor version of the platform.
1. Via OCM, the service consumer requests the minor version update. They can do this at any time with confidence that the maintenance 
   schedule will be honored. They do so on Wednesday.
1. OCM (through various layers) updates the ClusterVersion resource on the cluster indicating the new release payload in `desiredUpdate`.
1. The Cluster Version Operator (CVO) detects that its `changeManagement` stanza does not permit the initiation of the change.
1. The CVO sets a metric indicating that changes are pending for ClusterVersion. Irrespective of pending changes, the CVO also exposes a 
   metric indicating the number of seconds until the next window in which material changes can be initiated.

> 1. Since MachineConfigs do not match in the desired update and the current manifests, the CVO also sets a metric indicating that MachineConfig

Reviewer: How does this work? Do we need code in CVO to compare MachineConfigs? Or would CVO ask MCO to do the comparison somehow and report the results? Or can we figure out that a change is needed without deep semantic comparison of the manifests and live state of the system?

Author: I actually think it is safe to _assume_ it will change. If CVO has not reconciled manifests for the desired release payload, just set this metric. This is true in 100% of non-hotfix release  payloads since RHCOS is changing. Additionally, the price of being wrong is very low. The master changes will roll out and the apparently pending machine changes quickly disappear without any disruption.

Reviewer: That seems like a reasonable assumption. Is that captured in the body somewhere?

Author: Added in latest push.

   changes are pending. This is done because the MachineConfigOperator (MCO) cannot anticipate the coming manifest changes and cannot,
   therefore, reflect expected changes to the worker-node MCPs. Anticipating this change ahead of time is necessary for an operation
   team to be able to set an alert with the semantics (worker-node-update changes are pending & time remaining until changes are permitted < 2d).
   The MCO will expose its own metric for changes pending when manifests are updated. But this metric will only indicate when 
   there are machines in the pool that have not achieved the desired configuration. An operations team trying to implement the 2d 
   early warning for worker-nodes must use OR on these metrics to determine whether changes are actually pending.
1. The MCO, irrespective of pending changes, exposes a metric for each MCP to indicate the number of seconds remaining until it is
   permitted to initiate changes to nodes in that MCP.
1. A privileged user on the cluster notices different options available for `changeManagement` in the ClusterVersion and MachineConfigPool

>    resources. They try to set them but are prevented by either RBAC or an admission webhook (details for Service Delivery). If they wish

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   resources. They try to set them but are prevented by validating admission controller. If they wish
```

Customers can use `cluster-admin` so blocking critical resource edits is done via admission controller.

   the most recent, desired configuration.    
1. On the first Saturday of the next month, the MCO resumes its work. In order to ensure that forward progress is
   made for all nodes, the MCO will update nodes that have the oldest current configuration first. This ensures
   that even if the desired configuration has changed multiple times while maintenance was not permitted,
   no nodes are starved of updates. Consider the alternative where (a) worker-node updates required > 24h,
   (b) updates to nodes are performed alphabetically, and (c) MachineConfigs are frequently being changed
   during times when maintenance is not permitted. This strategy could leave nodes sorting last 
   lexicographically no opportunity to receive updates. This scenario would eventually leave those nodes
   more prone to version skew issues.
1. During this window of time, all node updates are initiated, and they complete successfully. 

#### Service Delivery Emergency Patch
1. SRE determines that a significant new CVE threatens the fleet.
1. A new OpenShift release in each z-stream fixes the problem.

> 1. SRE plans to override customer maintenance schedules in order to rapidly remediate the problem across the fleet.

Reviewer 2: SRE have a couple of options and it depends on if it's HCP or not.

If HCP and the issue is signifigent enough, yes we would stage the update and force the change to land regardless of the customer maintenance schedule.

For Classic, where control plane is in customer's account, there is an important question to answer:  does this impact SRE's ability to provide support and/or impact SLA with customer?

If yes, there is a support and/or SLA impcat, then SRE would do the same as with HCP and pushed the upgrade through.

If no, the change would be staged and customer schedule will pick it up on the next update.  Customer will be notified and has an option to update earlier.  Customer can defer the update as usual.

   schedules begin to apply the changes immediately.
1. Clusters with change management policies precluding updates are SRE's next focus.
1. During each region's evening hours, to limit disruption, SRE changes the `changeManagement` strategy 
   field across relevant resources to `Disabled`. Changes that were previously pending are now
   permitted to be initiated. 
1. Cluster operators who have alerts configured to fire when there is no change management policy in place 
   will do so.
1. As clusters are successfully remediated, SRE restores the `MaintenanceSchedule` strategy for its resources.
   

#### Service Delivery Immediate Remediation
1. A customer raises a ticket for a problem that is eventually determined to be caused by a worker-node system configuration.
1. SRE can address the issue with a system configuration file applied in a MachineConfig.
1. SRE creates the MachineConfig for the customer and provides the customer the option to either (a) wait until their
   configured maintenance schedule permits the material change from being initiated by the MachineConfigOperator

>    or (b) having SRE override the maintenance schedule and permitting its immediate application.   

Reviewer 2: I don't expect SRE will override the schedule in this scenario.  The change would be staged and customer notified of options.  Customer can either wait for their next update window or the customer can permit the change to progress.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

#### ChangeManagement Stanza
The change management stanza will be introduced into ClusterVersion and MachineConfigPool (for standalone profiles)
and HostedCluster and NodePool (for HCP profiles). The structure of the stanza is:

```yaml
spec:
  changeManagement:
    # The active strategy for change management (unless disabled by disabledUntil).
    strategy: <strategy-name|Disabled|null>
    
    # If set to true or a future date, the effective change management strategy is Disabled. Date 
    # must be RFC3339. 
    disabledUntil: <bool|date|null>
    
    # If set to true or a future date, all strategies other than Disabled are paused. Date 
    # must be RFC3339. 
    pausedUntil: <bool|date|null>    
    
    # If a strategy needs additional configuration information, it can read a 
    # key bearing its name in the config stanza.
    config:
       <strategy-name>:
         ...configuration policy for the strategy...
```

#### MaintenanceSchedule Strategy Configuration

```yaml
spec:
  changeManagement:
    strategy: MaintenanceSchedule
    config:
       maintenanceSchedule:
        # Specifies a reoccurring permissive window. 

>         permit:  

Reviewer 2: Is there a way to configure a rule to span days?  I.e. permit start = 10PM UTC on Saturday, end 2AM UTC on Sunday

          # RRULEs (https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5545#section-3.3.10) are commonly used 

>           # for calendar management metadata. Only a subset of the RFC is supported. If

Reviewer 2: What subset is supported (or not supported)?

Author: Adding `See "RRULE Constraints" section for details.` in next push.

          # unset, all dates are permitted and only exclude constrains permissive windows.
          recurrence: <rrule|null>
          # Given the identification of a date by an RRULE, at what time (relative to timezoneOffset) can the 
          # permissive window begin. "00:00" if unset.
          startTime: <time-of-day|null>
          # Given the identification of a date by an RRULE, at what time (relative to timezoneOffset) should the 
          # permissive window end. "23:59:59" if unset.
          endTime: <time-of-day|null>
        
        # Excluded date ranges override RRULE selections.

>         exclude:

Reviewer 2: Recommend allowing a datetime, not just date, for the fromDate and untilDate to give full control to.  Else the configuration is very coarse and may result in customer frustration.  For example, if an exclusion period is through 12PM UTC on a Sunday and updates can only be done on a weekend, with this configuration it's not possible to use the remaining 12 hours on Sunday to apply updates.

        # Dates should be specified in YYYY-MM-DD. Each date is excluded from 00:00<timezoneOffset> for 24 hours.
        - fromDate: <date>
          # Non-inclusive until. If null, until defaults to the day after from (meaning a single day exclusion).
          untilDate: <date|null>

        # Specifies an RFC3339 style timezone offset to be applied across their datetime selections.
        # "-07:00" indicates negative 7 hour offset from UTC. "+03:00" indicates positive 3 hour offset. If not set, defaults to "+00:00" (UTC). 

>         timezoneOffset: <null|str>

Reviewer 2: In my opinion the use of timezone will complicate things and make it confusing for those who will look at this configuration or manage it.  I recommend removing the ability to set a timezone offset and stick with UTC in all scenarios.

          # When AllowSettings, rendered configurations after the preceding before date
          # can be applied if and only if they do not contain changes to osImageURL.
          policy: "AllowSettings|AllowNone"
```

The primary user of this strategy is `oc` with tentatively planned enhancements to include verbs 
like:
```sh
$ oc adm update worker-nodes start ...
$ oc adm update worker-nodes pause ...
$ oc adm update worker-nodes rollback ...
```

These verbs can leverage the assisted strategy and `pausedUntil` to allow the manual initiation of worker-nodes
updates after a control-plane update. 

#### MachineConfigPool Manual Strategy Configuration

```yaml
spec:
  changeManagement:
    strategy: Manual
    config:
      manual:
        desiredConfig: <rendered-configuration-name>
```

The manual strategy requests no automated initiation of updates. New and rebooting
nodes will only receive the desired configuration. From a metrics perspective, this strategy
is always paused state.

#### Metrics

`cm_change_pending`
Labels:
- kind=ClusterVersion|MachineConfigPool|HostedCluster|NodePool
- object=<object-name>
- system=<control-plane|worker-nodes>

> Value: 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

Value: 
```

- `0`: no material changes are pending.
- `1`: changes are pending but being initiated.
- `2`: changes are pending and blocked based on this resource's change management policy.
- `3`: changes are pending and blocked based on another resource in the change management hierarchy.

`cm_change_eta`
Labels:
- kind=ClusterVersion|MachineConfigPool|HostedCluster|NodePool
- object=<object-name>
- system=<control-plane|worker-nodes>

> Value: 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

Value: 
```

- `-2`: Error determining the time at which changes can be initiated (e.g. cannot check with ClusterVersion / change management hierarchy).
- `-1`: Material changes are paused indefinitely OR no permissive window can be found within the next 1000 days (the latter ensures a brute force check of intersecting datetimes with hierarchy RRULEs is a valid method of calculating intersection).
- `0`: Any pending changes can be initiated now (e.g. change management is disabled or inside machine schedule window).
- `> 0`: The number seconds remaining until changes can be initiated. 

`cm_strategy_enabled`
Labels:
- kind=ClusterVersion|MachineConfigPool|HostedCluster|NodePool
- object=<object-name>
- system=<control-plane|worker-nodes>
- strategy=MaintenanceSchedule|Manual|Assisted

> Value: 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

Value: 
```

- `0`: Change management for this resource is not subject to this enabled strategy (**does** consider hierarchy based disable).
- `1`: Change management for this resource is directly subject to this enabled strategy.
- `2`: Change management for this resource is indirectly subject to this enabled strategy (i.e. only via control-plane override hierarchy).
- `3`: Change management for this resource is directly and indirectly subject to this enabled strategy.

#### Change Management Status

> Each resource which exposes a `.spec.changeManagement` stanza should also expose `.status.changeManagement` . 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each resource which exposes a `.spec.changeManagement` stanza must also expose `.status.changeManagement` . 
```

I don't think this should be optional.  Given the layers in change management, it's important to get status for any configured change reflected in the status of any resource that is impacted by the status of those other layers.

calculating when the next permissive window will occur (called elsewhere in the document, ETA). This is not
straightforward to compute when both the control-plane and worker-nodes have independent MaintenanceSchedule 
configurations.

We can, however, simplify the process by reducing the number of days in the future the algorithm must search for
coinciding permissive windows. 1000 days is a proposed cut-off.

To calculate coinciding windows then, the implementation can use [rrule-go](https://github.com/teambition/rrule-go) 
to iteratively find permissive windows at the cluster / control-plane level. These can be added to an 
[interval-tree](https://github.com/rdleal/intervalst) . As dates are added, rrule calculations for the worker-nodes
can be performed. The interval-tree should be able to efficiently determine whether there is an
intersection between the permissive intervals it has stored for the control-plane and the time range tested for the 
worker-nodes.

Since it is possible there is no overlap, limits must be placed on this search. Once dates >1000 days from

> the present moment are being tested, the operator can behave as if an indefinite pause has been requested.

Reviewer 2: Why not behave as though pauseUntil was set to the date for that 1000th day?  This closes a timing hole where it is possible (as unlikley as it seems to us now) for the cluster to get stuck in a paused state even though there might be something scheduled in the far future.

Author: I like that!

configurations are inconsistent with the API server). 

## Operational Aspects of API Extensions

The API extensions proposed by this enhancement should not substantially increase
the scope of work of operators implementing the change management support. The
operators will interact with the same underlying resources/CRDs but with
constraints around when changes can be initiated. As such, no significant _new_ 
operational aspects are expected to be introduced.

## Support Procedures

Change management problems created by faulty implementations will need to be resolved by 
analyzing operator logs. The operator responsible for a given resource will vary. Existing
support tooling like must-gather should capture the information necessary to understand
and fix issues. 

Change management problems where user expectations are not being met are designed to
be informed by the detailed `status` provided by the resources bearing the `changeManagement`
stanza in their `spec`.

## Alternatives

### Implement maintenance schedules via an external control system (e.g. ACM)
We do not have an offering in this space. ACM is presently devoted to cluster monitoring and does

> not participate in cluster lifecycle.

Reviewer: We could add it there, though, right? Or as an OLM-installed operator?

Author: Yes, it could. The conclusion presented here was with guidance from Derek.

it is risky to impose a single opinionated workflow onto the wide variety of consumers of the platform. The workflows
described in this enhancement are not intended to be exotic or contrived but situations in which flexibility
in our configuration can achieve real world, reasonable goals. 

`disabledUntil` is designed to support our Service Delivery team who, on occasion, will need
to be able to bypass configured change controls. The feature is easy to use, does not require 
deleting or restoring customer configuration (which may be error-prone), and can be safely 
"forgotten" after being set to a date in the future.

`pausedUntil`, among other interesting possibilities, offers a cluster lifecycle administrator the ability
to stop a problematic update from unfolding further. You may have watched a 100 node
cluster roll out a bad configuration change without knowing exactly how to stop the damage
without causing further disruption. This is not a moment when you want to be figuring out how to format
a date string, calculating timezones, or copying around cluster configuration so that you can restore

> it after you stop the bleeding.

Reviewer: What is driving the request for this feature, managed services or users with self-managed clusters?

Author: It unfolded as follows (see motivation section for more depth on each point):
1. There is a negative perception of upgrades due to worker nodes being entangled with the end to end process. It also forces unnecessary maintenance on nodes and risks for customers.
2. We can eliminate those problems and empower users by separating the control-plane and worker-node updates.
3. @derekwaynecarr raised the concern that doing so would double operational burden. Also guidance that whatever improvements we make in standalone should be in HCP.
4. Maintenance windows were identified as a tool which could prevent new operational burden for customers who may not benefit from the separation. Maintenance windows are also a common configuration in other managed kubernetes solutions.
5. SRE, as part of all these conversations, indicates product level support for maintenance windows would help simplify their existing implementation. 
6. Exploration of all other benefits of change management & scheduling which simplify operations.

So, item (1) was the genesis (particularly in standalone since SRE manages to insulate customers from gaps today), but we found additional value along the path.

regularly (e.g. to patch CVEs) with a permissive change management configuration
for the control-plane while using a tight maintenance schedule for worker-nodes
to only update during specific, low utilization, periods.

Since separating the node update phases is such an important driver for
Maintenance Schedules, their motivations are heavily intertwined. The remainder of this 
section, therefore, delves into the motivation for this separation. 

#### The Case for Control-Plane and Worker-Node Separation
From an overall platform perspective, we believe it is important to drive a distinction
between updates of the control-plane and worker-nodes. Currently, an update is initiated
and OpenShift's ostensibly fully self-managed update mechanics take over (CVO laying
out new manifests, cluster operators rolling out new operands, etc.) culminating with 
worker-nodes being drained a rebooted by the machine-config-operator (MCO) to align
them with the version of OpenShift running on the control-plane.

This approach has proven extraordinarily successful in providing a fast and reliable 
control-plane update, but, in rare cases, the highly opinionated update process leads

> to less than ideal outcomes. 

Reviewer 3: Should we re frame this section to combine more of what is in "Node Update Separation to Address Problems in User Perception" as the case here is more to give customers control on when to update worker nodes due to possible interruptions to their workloads.

Change Management, by providing control over exactly when updates & material changes to nodes in
the cluster can be initiated, provide value irrespective of this strategic direction. The benefit of
controlling exactly when changes are applied to critical systems is universally appreciated in enterprise 
software. 

Since these are such well established principles, I will summarize the motivation as helping
OpenShift meet industry standard expectations with respect to limiting potentially disruptive change 
outside well planned time windows. 

It could be argued that rigorous and time sensitive management of OpenShift cluster API resources could prevent
unplanned material changes, but Change Management / Maintenance Schedules introduce higher level, platform native, and more 
intuitive guard rails. For example, consider the common pattern of a gitops configured OpenShift cluster.
If a user wants to introduce a change to a MachineConfig, it is simple to merge a change to the
resource without appreciating the fact that it will trigger a rolling reboot of nodes in the cluster.

Trying to merge this change at a particular time of day and/or trying to pause and unpause a 

> MachineConfigPool to limit the impact of that merge to a particular time window requires

Author: Yep. Added in next push.

  change management in the resource is `Disabled`. Setting a future date in `disabledUntil` offers a less invasive (i.e. no important configuration needs to be changed) method to 
  disable change management constraints (e.g. if it is critical to roll out a fix) and a method that
  does not need to be reverted (i.e. it will naturally expire after the specified date and the configured
  change management strategy will re-activate).
- `changeManagement.pausedUntil: <bool|date>`: Unless the effective active strategy is Disabled, `pausedUntil: true` or `pausedUntil: <future-date>`, change management must 
  pause material changes.

### Change Management Status
Change Management information will also be reflected in resource status. Each resource 
which contains the stanza in its `spec` will expose its current impact in its `status`. 
Common user interfaces for aggregating and displaying progress of these underlying resources
should be updated to proxy that status information to the end users.

### Change Management Metrics
Cluster wide change management information will be made available through cluster metrics. Each resource
containing the stanza must expose the following metrics:

> - The number of seconds until the next known permitted change window. 0 if changes can currently be initiated. -1 if changes are paused indefinitely. -2 if no permitted window can be computed.

Author: Adding `cm_change_remaining` status & metric in the next push. It will represent the number seconds remaining in the current permissive change window.
- `disabledUntil` will have `cm_change_remaining` > 0 and `cm_change_eta` == 0.
- `strategy: disabled` will have `cm_change_remaining` == -1 and `cm_change_eta` == 0.
- `pausedUntil` will have `cm_change_remaining` == 0 and `cm_change_eta` > 0.

- Whether any change management strategy is enabled.
- Which change management strategy is enabled.
- If changes are pending due to change management controls.

### Change Management Hierarchy
Material changes to worker-nodes are constrained by change management policies in their associated resource AND 
at the control-plane resource. For example, in a standalone profile, if a MachineConfigPool's change management
configuration apparently permits material changes from being initiated at a given moment, that is only the case 
if ClusterVersion is **also** permitting changes from being initiated at that time.

The design choice is informed by a thought experiment: As a cluster lifecycle administrator for a Standalone cluster,
who wants to achieve the simple goal of ensuring no material changes take place outside a well-defined 
maintenance schedule, do you want to have to the challenge of keeping every MachineConfigPool's 
`changeManagement` stanza in perfect synchronization with the ClusterVersion's? What if a new MCP is created 

> without your knowledge?

Reviewer 4: MachineConfigPools consume inputs from many places, and ClusterVersion updates are only one aspect.  https://amd64.ocp.releases.ci.openshift.org/ -> [4.16.0-ec.4](https://amd64.ocp.releases.ci.openshift.org/releasestream/4-dev-preview/release/4.16.0-ec.4) -> [aws-ovn-serial](https://prow.ci.openshift.org/view/gs/test-platform-results/logs/periodic-ci-openshift-release-master-nightly-4.16-e2e-aws-ovn-serial/1767648317749071872) -> [Artifacts](https://gcsweb-ci.apps.ci.l2s4.p1.openshiftapps.com/gcs/test-platform-results/logs/periodic-ci-openshift-release-master-nightly-4.16-e2e-aws-ovn-serial/1767648317749071872/) -> ... -> [gather-extra artifacts](https://gcsweb-ci.apps.ci.l2s4.p1.openshiftapps.com/gcs/test-platform-results/logs/periodic-ci-openshift-release-master-nightly-4.16-e2e-aws-ovn-serial/1767648317749071872/artifacts/e2e-aws-ovn-serial/gather-extra/artifacts/):

```console
$ curl -s https://gcsweb-ci.apps.ci.l2s4.p1.openshiftapps.com/gcs/test-platform-results/logs/periodic-ci-openshift-release-master-nightly-4.16-e2e-aws-ovn-serial/1767648317749071872/artifacts/e2e-aws-ovn-serial/gather-extra/artifacts/machineconfigs.json | jq -r '.items[].metadata | .creationTimestamp + " " + .name' | grep rendered-worker- | sort
2024-03-12T20:45:43Z rendered-worker-9724b3c3c79d2e58b093eb46d0c2c3ff
2024-03-12T20:51:58Z rendered-worker-33a6a11e659aca048b955f168eb770f3
2024-03-12T20:52:04Z rendered-worker-3e2eab9d46a1db0948347f34d268ea61
$ curl -s https://gcsweb-ci.apps.ci.l2s4.p1.openshiftapps.com/gcs/test-platform-results/logs/periodic-ci-openshift-release-master-nightly-4.16-e2e-aws-ovn-serial/1767648317749071872/artifacts/e2e-aws-ovn-serial/gather-extra/artifacts/machineconfigpools.json | jq -c '.items[] | select(.metadata.name == "worker").status.configuration.source[]'
{"apiVersion":"machineconfiguration.openshift.io/v1","kind":"MachineConfig","name":"00-worker"}
{"apiVersion":"machineconfiguration.openshift.io/v1","kind":"MachineConfig","name":"01-worker-container-runtime"}
{"apiVersion":"machineconfiguration.openshift.io/v1","kind":"MachineConfig","name":"01-worker-kubelet"}
{"apiVersion":"machineconfiguration.openshift.io/v1","kind":"MachineConfig","name":"97-worker-generated-kubelet"}
{"apiVersion":"machineconfiguration.openshift.io/v1","kind":"MachineConfig","name":"98-worker-generated-kubelet"}
{"apiVersion":"machineconfiguration.openshift.io/v1","kind":"MachineConfig","name":"99-worker-generated-registries"}
{"apiVersion":"machineconfiguration.openshift.io/v1","kind":"MachineConfig","name":"99-worker-ssh"}
```

Instead of having it implicitly assumed that ClusterVersion is going to be the controlling resource taking precedence over local MachineConfigPool configuration, maybe `changeManagement` could explicitly declare that with references to higher-precedence managers?

Or, because that would make the system even more complicated, how likely is it that folks are creating new MachineConfigPools without looping in cluster lifecycle administrators?  If cluster lifecycle administrators cannot agree amongst themselves, that is not a problem we can solve with tooling.  If they do agree, but want unified control over the policy, I'm not as down on UpdatePolicy CRD as the current alternatives-section is, and possibly there's a way to mitigate the concerns around that while still avoiding implicit or explicit hierarchy complications.

Author: There were two motivations to the current proposal:
1. It is intended to be implementable with existing CAPI primitives. CAPI exposes "paused" on the two main resources [Cluster](https://pkg.go.dev/sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api/api/v1alpha3#ClusterSpec) and [MachineDeployment](https://pkg.go.dev/sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api/api/v1alpha3#MachineDeploymentPhase). My understanding is that pausing the Cluster pauses the MachineDeployment but not vice versa. This should allow the HyperShift operator to fulfill the simple changeManagement hierarchy by  pausing and unpausing these resources. If the enhancement calls for independence of changeManagement stanzas, we would need to be confident CAPI would accept a significant paradigm shift. I would only feel compelled to do that if we thought there was a significant advantage.
2. The guiding principle of "simple things should be simple." Setting something globally, once, and not having to keep it in mind for an unrelated activity reduces the mental overhead associated with the product. A diligent enough team can always solve for <footgun> with policy / clever automation / etc. But the more we ask this theoretical team to solve, the less pleasant the product is to use. "Cluster lifecycle administrator" is often going to be a single person trying to do lifecycle management along with everything else. Ideally, the enhancement will improve their QOL while also being flexible enough for plausible complicated use cases.

1. Cluster operators who have alerts configured to fire when there is no change management policy in place 
   will do so.
1. As clusters are successfully remediated, SRE restores the `MaintenanceSchedule` strategy for its resources.
   

#### Service Delivery Immediate Remediation
1. A customer raises a ticket for a problem that is eventually determined to be caused by a worker-node system configuration.
1. SRE can address the issue with a system configuration file applied in a MachineConfig.
1. SRE creates the MachineConfig for the customer and provides the customer the option to either (a) wait until their
   configured maintenance schedule permits the material change from being initiated by the MachineConfigOperator
   or (b) having SRE override the maintenance schedule and permitting its immediate application.   
1. The customer chooses immediate application. 
1. SRE applies a change to the relevant control-plane AND worker-node resource's `changeManagement` stanza
   (both must be changed because of the change management hierarchy), setting `disabledUntil` to
   a time 48 hours in the future. The configured change management schedule is ignored for 48 as the system 

>    initiates all necessary node changes.

Author: Right - this would be for emergency purposes only. `machineconfiguration.openshift.io/bypass-change-management` is another option if you didn't need to announce an end of maintenance guarantee to customers.

```

Permitted times (i.e. times at which the strategy enforcement state can be permissive) are specified using a 
subset of the [RRULE RFC5545](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5545#section-3.3.10) and, optionally, a
starting and ending time of day. https://freetools.textmagic.com/rrule-generator is a helpful tool to
review the basic semantics RRULE is capable of expressing. https://exontrol.com/exicalendar.jsp?config=/js#calendar
offers more complex expressions.

**RRULE Interpretation**
RRULE supports expressions that suggest recurrence without implying an exact date. For example:
- `RRULE:FREQ=YEARLY` - An event that occurs once a year on a specific date. 
- `RRULE:FREQ=WEEKLY;INTERVAL=2` - An event that occurs every two weeks.

All such expressions shall be evaluated with a starting date of Jan 1st, 1970 00:00Z. In other
words, `RRULE:FREQ=YEARLY` would be considered permissive, for one day, at the start of each new year.

If no `startTime` or `duration` is specified, any day selected by the RRULE will suggest a
permissive 24h window unless a date is in the `exclude` ranges.

**RRULE Constraints**
A valid RRULE for change management:

> - must identify a date, so, although RRULE supports `FREQ=HOURLY`, it will not be supported.

Author: clarified that an attempt to use them will be rejected.

status:
  changeManagement:
    # Always show control-plane level strategy. Disabled if disabledUntil is true.
    clusterStrategy: <Disabled|MaintenanceSchedule>
    # If this a worker-node related resource (e.g. MCP), show local strategy. Disabled if disabledUntil is true.
    workerNodeStrategy: <Disabled|MaintenanceSchedule|Manual|Assisted>
    # Show effective state.
    effectiveState: <Changes Paused|Changes Permitted>
    description: "Human readable message explaining how strategies & configuration are resulting in the effective state."
    # The start of the next permissive window, taking into account the hierarchy. "N/A" for indefinite pause.
    permitChangesETA: <datetime>
    changesPending: <Yes|No>
```

#### Change Management Bypass Annotation
In some situations, it may be necessary for a MachineConfig to be applied regardless of the active change
management policy for a MachineConfigPool. In such cases, `machineconfiguration.openshift.io/bypass-change-management`
can be set to any non-empty string. The MCO will progress until MCPs which select annotated
MachineConfigs have all machines running with a desiredConfig containing that MachineConfig's current state.

> 

Author: Yes - if customer does not need any guarantees on the end of the maintenance.

intersection between the permissive intervals it has stored for the control-plane and the time range tested for the 
worker-nodes.

Since it is possible there is no overlap, limits must be placed on this search. Once dates >1000 days from
the present moment are being tested, the operator can behave as if the next window will occur in
1000 days (prevents infinite search for overlap).

This outcome does not need to be recomputed unless the operator restarts Or one of the RRULE involved
is modified.

If an overlap _is_ found, no additional intervals need to be added to the tree and it can be discarded.
The operator can store the start & end datetimes for the overlap and count down the seconds remaining 
until it occurs. Obviously, this calculation must be repeated:
1. If either MaintenanceSchedule configuration is updated.
1. The operator is restarted.
1. At the end of a permissive window, in order to determine the next permissive window.

#### Service Delivery Option Sanitization
It is obvious that the range of flexible options provided by change management configurations offers
can create risks for inexperienced cluster lifecycle administrators. For example, setting a 

> standalone cluster to use the Assisted strategy and failing to trigger worker-node updates will

Reviewer 3: Managed OpenShift clusters are not able to change the MachineConfigPool strategy due to platform restrictions. We don't expect this to be a supported configuration.

Author: +1 - just an example of why restrictions for a managed fleet are a good idea.

leave unpatched CVEs on worker-nodes much longer than necessary. It will also eventually lead to
the need to resolve version skew (Upgradeable=False will be reported by the API cluster operator).

> Service Delivery understands that expose the full range of options to cluster

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Service Delivery understands that exposing the full range of options to cluster

```

material changes are completed by the close of a permitted change window (e.g. a worker-node
may still be draining or rebooting) at the close of a maintenance schedule, 
but it does prevent _additional_ material changes from being initiated. 

Change management enforcement _does not_ attempt to define or control the detailed state of the
system. It only pertains to whether controllers which support change management 
will attempt to initiate material change themselves. For example, if changes are paused in the middle
of a cluster update and a node is manually rebooted, change management does not define
whether the node will rejoin the cluster with the new or old version. 

A "material change" may vary by cluster profile and subsystem. For example, a 
control-plane update (all components and control-plane nodes updated) is implemented as
a single material change (e.g. the close of a scheduled permissive window
will not suspend its progress). In contrast, the rollout of worker-node updates is
more granular (you can consider it as many individual material changes) and  
the end of a permitted change window will prevent additional worker-node updates 

> from being initiated.

Reviewer 5: How will we define and track (long-term) what is a material change for a given profile and subsystem? It seems hard to rely just on intuition, how will we avoid bugs like "cluster operator $late started updating after permissive window closed, why?".

Author: Thankfully there are only two subsystems right now: worker-nodes and control-plane. The difference between the two is that a control-plane update is treated as a single material change and worker-node updates are treated as one per node. In short, control-plane updates can't be paused in the middle at the end of a permissive window. 
API docs and user docs will need to clearly communicate expectations for anything that supports the stanza. I agree that relying solely on intuition could lead to a bad time.

Changes vital to the continued operation of the cluster (e.g. certificate rotation) 
are not considered material changes. Ignoring operational practicalities (e.g.
the need to fix critical bugs or update a cluster to supported software versions), 
it should be possible to safely leave changes pending indefinitely. That said,
Service Delivery and/or higher level management systems may choose to prevent
such problematic change management settings from being applied by using 

> validating webhooks.

Author: Including policies option in the next push.

pools. This means that the existing machine config pool based pause is not directly available. It is 
not exposed via OCM either. This enhancement seeks to create high level abstractions supporting the 
separation of control-plane and worker-nodes that will be straight-forward and intuitive options
to expose through OCM.

#### Enhancing Operational Control
The preceding section delved deeply into a motivation for Change Management / Maintenance Schedules based on our desire to 
separate control-plane and worker-node updates without increasing operational burden on end-users. However,
Change Management, by providing control over exactly when updates & material changes to nodes in
the cluster can be initiated, provide value irrespective of this strategic direction. The benefit of
controlling exactly when changes are applied to critical systems is universally appreciated in enterprise 
software. 

Since these are such well established principles, I will summarize the motivation as helping
OpenShift meet industry standard expectations with respect to limiting potentially disruptive change 
outside well planned time windows. 

> It could be argued that rigorous and time sensitive management of OpenShift cluster API resources could prevent

Author: ClusterVersion, MachineConfigPool, MachineConfig, HostedCluster, and NodePool. They can all actuate MAPI/CAPI to cause disruptive operations on nodes.

unplanned material changes, but Change Management / Maintenance Schedules introduce higher level, platform native, and more 
intuitive guard rails. For example, consider the common pattern of a gitops configured OpenShift cluster.
If a user wants to introduce a change to a MachineConfig, it is simple to merge a change to the
resource without appreciating the fact that it will trigger a rolling reboot of nodes in the cluster.

> Trying to merge this change at a particular time of day and/or trying to pause and unpause a 

Reviewer 6: +1 , in 4.16 (as TechPreview) MCO has introduced a user facing cluster level API using which admin can specify what action to take if change involve only certain change that admin thinks is safe. 
Not sure, how much this feature makes impact to this EP since it targets improving UX for customers who doesn't want to go through the pain of pause/unpause of pools.   Also, reboot will take priority if the overall MachinceConfig diff has changes that definitely require reboot like OS Update, kernelArgs change.

> Trying to merge this change at a particular time of day and/or trying to pause and unpause a 

Author: https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1525 is a great EP and I think it melds well with this proposal. A `nodeDisruptionPolicy` which states a MachineConfiguration does not require a node reboot becomes a non-material change in this proposal that can roll out immediate (I realize that applying changes like this could be material in the true sense of the word, but the cluster admin is specifically telling us "do it anyway" and so would not be gated by the maintenance schedule).

> Trying to merge this change at a particular time of day and/or trying to pause and unpause a 

Author: Adding a section about this in Special Handling and resolving this thread.

> (control-plane or worker-nodes) are only initiated during well known windows of low service 
> utilization to reduce the impact of any service disruption."

> "As a cluster lifecycle administrator, I want to ensure any material changes to my 
> control-plane are only initiated during well known windows of low service utilization to 
> reduce the impact of any service disruption."

> "As a cluster lifecycle administrator, I want to ensure that no material changes to my 
> cluster occur during a known date range even if it falls within our
> normal maintenance schedule due to an anticipated atypical usage (e.g. Black Friday)."

> "As a cluster lifecycle administrator, I want to pause additional material changes from 
> taking place when it is no longer practical to monitor for service disruptions. For example,
> if a worker-node update is proving to be problematic during a valid permissive window, I would
> like to be able to pause that change manually so that the team will not have to work on the weekend."

> "As a cluster lifecycle administrator, I need to stop all material changes on my cluster

> > quickly and indefinitely until I can understand a potential issue. I not want to consider dates or

Author: Thanks! Next push.

> "As a cluster lifecycle administrator, I want to easily determine the next time at which maintenance operations
> will be permitted to be initiated, based on the configured maintenance schedule, by looking at the 
> status of relevant API resources or metrics."

> "As a cluster lifecycle administrator, I want to easily determine whether there are material changes pending for
> my cluster, awaiting a permitted window based on the configured maintenance schedule, by looking at the 
> status of relevant API resources or metrics."

> "As a cluster lifecycle administrator, I want to easily determine whether a maintenance schedule is currently being
> enforced on my cluster by looking at the status of relevant API resources or metrics."

> "As a cluster lifecycle administrator, I want to be able to alert my operations team when changes are pending,
> when and the number of seconds to the next permitted window approaches, or when a maintenance schedule is not being
> enforced on my cluster."

> "As a cluster lifecycle administrator, I want to be able to diagnose why pending changes have not been applied

> > if I expected them to be."

Author: I will have to read the node reboot policy EP, but certainly MCO pausing is within the scope of what the operator could interpret and report up through status for maintenance schedule.

> > if I expected them to be."

Author: Resolving this thread since the node disruption policy EP seems complementary with what is proposed with maintenance schedules. Details added in the `Node Disruption Policy` section.

- HCP's `NodePool`. Honored by HyperShift Operator and supported by underlying CAPI primitives.
- Standalone's `ClusterVersion`. Honored by Cluster Version Operator.
- Standalone's `MachineConfigPool`. Honored by Machine Config Operator.

The implementation of `changeManagement` will vary by profile
and resource, however, they will share a core schema and provide a reasonably consistent user
experience across profiles. 

The schema will provide options for controlling exactly when changes to API resources on the 
cluster can initiate material changes to the cluster. Changes that are not allowed to be
initiated due to a change management control will be called "pending". Subsystems responsible
for initiating pending changes will await a permitted window according to the change's
relevant `changeManagement` configuration(s).

### Change Management Strategies
Each resource supporting change management will add the `changeManagement` stanza and support a minimal set of change management strategies.
Each strategy may require an additional configuration element within the stanza. For example:
```yaml
spec:
  changeManagement:
    strategy: "MaintenanceSchedule"
    pausedUntil: false

>     disabledUntil: false

Author: Understood. These fields allow `bool || date` and are modeled on HyperShift's existing `pausedUntil` (https://hypershift-docs.netlify.app/how-to/pause-reconciliation/) in order to provide a familiar theme between standalone and HyperShift.

>     disabledUntil: false

Reviewer 7: Right, just looking at how that's implemented, it's just as a string. I _think_ that means that `disabledUntil: false` would actually fail validation, but `disabledUntil: "false"` would pass, it's an interesting field structure, from an API/CRD schema perspective it's not ideal as the validation is complex, but if there's a strong desire to match the API we can discuss

```

All change management implementations must support `Disabled` and `MaintenanceSchedule`. Abstracting 
change management into strategies allows for simplified future expansion or deprecation of strategies. 
Tactically, `strategy: Disabled` provides a convenient syntax for bypassing any configured 
change management policy without permanently deleting its configuration.

For example, if SRE needs to apply emergency corrective action on a cluster with a `MaintenanceSchedule` change
management strategy configured, they can simply set `strategy: Disabled` without having to delete the existing
`maintenanceSchedule` stanza which configures the previous strategy. Once the correct action has been completed,
SRE simply restores `strategy: MaintenanceSchedule` and the previous configuration begins to be enforced.

Configurations for multiple management strategies can be recorded in the `config` stanza, but
only one strategy can be active at a given time.

Each strategy will support a policy for pausing or unpausing (permitting) material changes from being initiated. 
This will be referred to as the strategy's enforcement state (or just "state"). The enforcement state for a

> strategy can be either "paused" or "unpaused" (a.k.a. "permissive"). The `Disabled` strategy enforcement state 

Author: The latter - current datetime, strategy, schedule, hierarchy, etc. feed into whether material changes can be initiated in the moment. With a simple RRULE based schedule, enforcement state would change automatically, as a function of time, according to the configured RRULE.

> strategy can be either "paused" or "unpaused" (a.k.a. "permissive"). The `Disabled` strategy enforcement state 

Reviewer 7: Right, so a controller has to work out when the RRULE would change state from allowed to disallowed and schedule a reconcile to update the status at that point in time, gotcha

is always permissive -- allowing material changes to be initiated (see [Change Management
Hierarchy](#change-management-hierarchy) for caveats).

All change management strategies, except `Disabled`, are subject to the following `changeManagement` fields:

> - `changeManagement.disabledUntil: <bool|date>`: When `disabledUntil: true` or `disabledUntil: <future-date>`, the interpreted strategy for 

Author: Linked above as well, but inspired by HyperShift to provide a consistent feel with their existing API: https://hypershift-docs.netlify.app/how-to/pause-reconciliation/ . That said, if it is a shaky foundation, maybe we suggest a change in HyperShift.

> - `changeManagement.disabledUntil: <bool|date>`: When `disabledUntil: true` or `disabledUntil: <future-date>`, the interpreted strategy for 

Reviewer 7: Lets consolidate into a single thread. But, in the past we have tried not to "repeat sins of the past" and recommend better structures that are more easily validateable and easier for users to be explicit about their expression of wish. The bool|date field is not easy to validate in CRD schemas, and it also is difficult to unmarshal without errors (since it is implemented as a string type, so there are definitely things we could do to make it more Kube native

  change management in the resource is `Disabled`. Setting a future date in `disabledUntil` offers a less invasive (i.e. no important configuration needs to be changed) method to 
  disable change management constraints (e.g. if it is critical to roll out a fix) and a method that
  does not need to be reverted (i.e. it will naturally expire after the specified date and the configured
  change management strategy will re-activate).
- `changeManagement.pausedUntil: <bool|date>`: Unless the effective active strategy is Disabled, `pausedUntil: true` or `pausedUntil: <future-date>`, change management must 
  pause material changes.

### Change Management Status
Change Management information will also be reflected in resource status. Each resource 
which contains the stanza in its `spec` will expose its current impact in its `status`. 
Common user interfaces for aggregating and displaying progress of these underlying resources
should be updated to proxy that status information to the end users.

> ### Change Management Metrics

Author: Added in next push.

Cluster wide change management information will be made available through cluster metrics. Each resource
containing the stanza must expose the following metrics:

> - The number of seconds until the next known permitted change window. See `cm_change_eta` metric.

Author: Expanding acronym in the next push.

| unpaused                | unpaused                  | unpaused                    | Traditional, fully self-managed change rollouts. Material changes can be initiated immediately upon configuration change. |
| paused (any strategy)   | **unpaused**              | **paused**                  | Changes to both the control-plane and worker-nodes are constrained by the control-plane strategy. |
| unpaused                | paused (any strategy)     | paused                      | Material changes can be initiated immediately on the control-plane. Material changes on worker-nodes are subject to the worker-node policy. |
| paused (any strategy)   | paused (any strategy)     | paused                      | Material changes to the control-plane are subject to change control strategy for the control-plane. Material changes to the worker-nodes are subject to **both** the control-plane and worker-node strategies - if either precludes material change initiation, changes are left pending. |

#### Maintenance Schedule Strategy
The maintenance schedule strategy is supported by all resources which support change management. The strategy

> is configured by specifying an RRULE identifying permissive datetimes during which material changes can be

Author: Adding RRULE reference material towards the top of the doc.

initiated. The cluster lifecycle administrator can also exclude specific date ranges, during which 
material changes will be paused.

#### Disabled Strategy
This strategy indicates that no change management strategy is being enforced by the resource. It always implies that
the enforcement state at the resource level is unpaused / permissive. This does not always
mean that material changes are permitted due to change management hierarchies. For example, a MachineConfigPool

> with `strategy: Disabled` would still be subject to a `strategy: MaintenanceStrategy` in the ClusterVersion resource.

Author: Hoping this will clear with the current layout of change management `status` in the MCP:
```
status:
  changeManagement:
    # Always show control-plane level strategy. Disabled if disabledUntil is "true".
    clusterStrategy: <Disabled|MaintenanceSchedule>
    # If this a worker-node related resource (e.g. MCP), show local strategy. Disabled if disabledUntil is "true".
    workerNodeStrategy: <Disabled|MaintenanceSchedule|Manual|Assisted>
    # Show effective state.
    effectiveState: <Changes Paused|Changes Permitted>
    description: "Human readable message explaining how strategies & configuration are resulting in the effective state."
...
```

So in this case MaintenanceSchedule/DIsabled scenario, the user would see the cluster strategy, their MCP strategy, what is actually happening for the specific MCP, and a human readable explanation.

#### Assisted Strategy - MachineConfigPool
Minimally, this strategy will be supported by MachineConfigPool. If and when the strategy is supported by other
change management capable resources, the configuration schema for the policy may differ as the details of
what constitutes and informs change varies between resources. 

This strategy is motivated by the desire to support the separation of control-plane and worker-node updates both
conceptually for users and in real technical terms. One way to do this for users who do not benefit from the
`MaintenanceSchedule` strategy is to ask them to initiate, pause, and resume the rollout of material
changes to their worker nodes. Contrast this with the fully self-managed state today, where worker-nodes

> (normally) begin to be updated automatically and directly after the control-plane update.

Reviewer 6: If I understood correctly, we are stating here how MCO works today. If that's the case, I think we want to say here control-plane and worker node starts update in parallel today based on maxUnavailable value set for the respective MachineConfigPool.

Author: ack. Clarifying in the next push that the update is subject to `maxUnavailable`.

12. The privileged user does an `oc describe ...` on the resources. They can see that material changes are pending in ClusterVersion for 
    the control-plane and for worker machine config. They can also see the date and time that the next material change will be permitted.
    The MCP will not show a pending change at this time, but will show the next time at which material changes will be permitted.
13. The next Saturday is _not_ the first Saturday of the month. The CVO detects that material changes are permitted at 00:00 UTC and
    begins to apply manifests. This effectively initiates the control-plane update process, which is considered a single
    material change to the cluster.
14. The control-plane update succeeds. The CVO, having reconciled its state, unsets metrics suggesting changes are pending.
15. As part of updating cluster manifests, MachineConfigs have been modified. The MachineConfigOperator (MCO) re-renders a
    configuration for worker-nodes. However, because the MCP maintenance schedule precludes initiating material changes,
    it will not begin to update Machines with that desired configuration.

> 16. The MCO will set a metric indicating that desired changes are pending. 

Reviewer 8: I think the closest we had were paused metrics for cert rotation purposes, but in the latest versions the rotation happens even while paused, so those were removed.

I think if the control plane is stalled, the operator will eventually think something went wrong with it being a required pool, but we can fix that when implementing this

1. The user determines the most recent rendered worker configuration. They configure the `manual` change
   management policy to use that exact configuration as the `desiredConfig`. 
1. The MCO is thus being asked to ignite any new node or rebooted node with the desired configuration, but it
   is **not** being permitted to apply that configuration to existing nodes because it is change management, in effect,
   is paused indefinitely by the manual strategy.
1. The MCO metric for the MCP indicating the number of seconds remaining until changes can be initiated is `-1` - indicating
   that there is presently no time in the future where it will initiate material changes. The operations team
   has an alert configured if this value `!= -1`.
1. The MCO metric for the MCP indicating that changes are pending is set because not all nodes are running
   the most recently rendered configuration. This is irrespective of the `desiredConfig` in the `manual` 
   policy. Abstractly, it means, if change management were disabled, whether changes be initiated.
1. The cluster lifecycle administrator manually drains and reboots nodes in the cluster. As they come back online,

>    the MachineConfigServer offers them the desiredConfig requested by the manual policy.

Reviewer 9: Yeah, this would just be the administrator annotates (labels?) each node with the new desiredConfig. MCO and MCD handle the rest from there. Administrator is responsible for annotating nodes in order they want and rate limiting that labeling however they want.

>    the MachineConfigServer offers them the desiredConfig requested by the manual policy.

Reviewer 8: The description here more matches with what hosted control planes are doing (except that HCP would spin up an entirely new node)

    strategy: <strategy-name|Disabled|null>
    
    # If set to true or a future date, the effective change management strategy is Disabled. Date 
    # must be RFC3339. 
    disabledUntil: <bool|date|null>
    
    # If set to true or a future date, all strategies other than Disabled are paused. Date 
    # must be RFC3339. 
    pausedUntil: <bool|date|null>    
    
    # If a strategy needs additional configuration information, it can read a 
    # key bearing its name in the config stanza.
    config:
       <strategy-name>:
         ...configuration policy for the strategy...
```

#### MaintenanceSchedule Strategy Configuration

```yaml
spec:
  changeManagement:
    strategy: MaintenanceSchedule
    config:
       maintenanceSchedule:
        # Specifies a reoccurring permissive window. 
        permit:  
          # RRULEs (https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5545#section-3.3.10) are commonly used 
          # for calendar management metadata. Only a subset of the RFC is supported.
          # See "RRULE Constraints" section for details.
          # If unset, all dates are permitted and only exclude constrains permissive windows.

>           recurrence: <rrule|null>

Author: I'd be interested in your ideas. I think it would end up needing to smell similar to be expressive enough to satisfy customers unless we wanted to go with something like CEL. Other factors which encouraged the choice:
- Initial assessment of https://github.com/teambition/rrule-go looked promising to prevent significant custom code. 
- Existing standard ensures easy to find doc and supporting tooling like https://freetools.textmagic.com/rrule-generator when customers want to build or check RRULEs.

fwiw, gcloud adopted RRULE: https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/how-to/maintenance-windows-and-exclusions .

>           recurrence: <rrule|null>

Reviewer 7: Well, what if the recurrence looked more like a structure of the various features of RRULE. We could apply succinct validation to the different parts of the RRULE that we support, and then convert to RRULE under the hood.

```
recurrence:
  frequency: Monthly
  interval: 3
  byDay:
    position: 2
    weekday: Sunday
```
Would convert down to `FREQ=MONTHLY;BYSETPOS=1;BYDAY=MO;INTERVAL=3`

But we can apply specific validations and help text to each part of the structure, and importantly, since we aren't taking in a raw string from the end user, we can control what they can input to prevent the `UNTIL` clause for example

>           recurrence: <rrule|null>

Author: Pros and cons. As a customer, I would much rather use a tool to generate an rrule and directly paste it into a CRD without having to decompose it into a structure. From an engineering perspective, I want validation to prevent them from hitting seemingly arbitrary limitations. 
Personally, I side with the copy & paste use case because I expect few will be trying to craft their own string/struct and validating / reporting issues with knobs like `UNTIL` in a string input can be achieved pretty easily.

>           recurrence: <rrule|null>

Reviewer 7: With the struct approach that I've suggested, users don't need to even know that we are using RRULE underneath, IMO we can expose this in a way that is clear without the cognitive load to think "oh I need a generator for this".

When do you want this to happen? Monthly
Every Month or Every X Months? Every *3* Months
When in the month do you want it to happen? On the *2nd* *Sunday*

Maybe I'm over simplying it slightly but with a well designed API, I don't think it will be hard for users to understand, vs RRULE which has keywords and special meanings for particular numeric values. We can map that complexity away if we think about the naming and values a bit.

Eg Position doesn't need to be called position, and rather than 2 as a value, we could have `First|Second|Third|Fourth|Last` as an enum rather than `{1, 2, 3, 4, -1}`

I'll try to find some time to go through RRULE again and suggest an API for this

review the basic semantics RRULE is capable of expressing. https://exontrol.com/exicalendar.jsp?config=/js#calendar
offers more complex expressions.

**RRULE Interpretation**
RRULE supports expressions that suggest recurrence without implying an exact date. For example:
- `RRULE:FREQ=YEARLY` - An event that occurs once a year on a specific date. 
- `RRULE:FREQ=WEEKLY;INTERVAL=2` - An event that occurs every two weeks.

All such expressions shall be evaluated with a starting date of Jan 1st, 1970 00:00Z. In other
words, `RRULE:FREQ=YEARLY` would be considered permissive, for one day, at the start of each new year.

If no `startTime` or `duration` is specified, any day selected by the RRULE will suggest a
permissive 24h window unless a date is in the `exclude` ranges.

**RRULE Constraints**
A valid RRULE for change management:
- must identify a date, so, although RRULE supports `FREQ=HOURLY`, it will be rejected if an attempt it made to use it.
- cannot specify an end for the pattern. `RRULE:FREQ=DAILY;COUNT=3` suggests
  an event that occurs every day for three days only. As such, neither `COUNT` nor `UNTIL` is 
  supported and will be rejected if an attempt is made to use them.

> - cannot specify a permissive window more than 2 years away.

Author: RRULEs can definitely express "only on Saturdays & Sundays" or "only on the last Saturday of each month", etc. https://exontrol.com/exicalendar.jsp?config=/js#calendar helps build an intuition of exactly how expressive it can be. I think it would be difficult to achieve with more structured data. 
Cron is discussed in alternatives, so I will address in your comment there.

          policy: "AllowSettings|AllowNone"
```

The primary user of this strategy is `oc` with tentatively planned enhancements to include verbs 
like:
```sh
$ oc adm update worker-nodes start ...
$ oc adm update worker-nodes pause ...
$ oc adm update worker-nodes rollback ...
```

These verbs can leverage the assisted strategy and `pausedUntil` to allow the manual initiation of worker-nodes
updates after a control-plane update. 

#### MachineConfigPool Manual Strategy Configuration

```yaml
spec:
  changeManagement:
    strategy: Manual
    config:
      manual:
        desiredConfig: <rendered-configuration-name>
```

The manual strategy requests no automated initiation of updates. New and rebooting
nodes will only receive the desired configuration. From a metrics perspective, this strategy
is always paused state.

#### Metrics

`cm_change_pending`
Labels:
- kind=ClusterVersion|MachineConfigPool|HostedCluster|NodePool
- object=<object-name>
- system=<control-plane|worker-nodes>

Value: 
- `0`: no material changes are pending.
- `1`: changes are pending but being initiated.
- `2`: changes are pending and blocked based on this resource's change management policy.

> - `3`: changes are pending and blocked based on another resource in the change management hierarchy.

Author: It would require docs. 0/1 values to indicate bools are common. I went beyond in this EP because I feel this area is ripe for "compliance" alerts; i.e. the administrator wants to know that their maintenance schedule is configured in the way they expect in order to prevent unexpected workload disruption and or want their operations teams to be aware of any temporary divergence (a fixed admission policy may be too rigid).
The metrics, therefore, try to communicate the operative aspects of the overall configuration, instead of simple status, to help an administrator craft alerts when expectations are violated. 
This thought process applied most to `cm_strategy_enabled`. I then used the same concept to provide some level of diagnostic insight for pending changes in `cm_change_pending`, but I'm less passionate about preserving the ability to alert on these particular values.

attention.

#### Change Management on Master MachineConfigPool
In order to allow control-plane updates as a single material change, the MCO will only honor change the management configuration for the 
master MachineConfigPool if user generated MachineConfigs are the cause for a pending change. To accomplish this, 
at least one MachineConfig updated by the CVO will have the `machineconfiguration.openshift.io/bypass-change-management` annotation
indicating that changes in the MachineConfig must be acted upon irrespective of the master MCP change management policy. 

#### Limiting Overlapping Window Search / Permissive Window Calculation
An operator implementing change management for a worker-node related resource must honor the change management hierarchy when
calculating when the next permissive window will occur (called elsewhere in the document, ETA). This is not
straightforward to compute when both the control-plane and worker-nodes have independent MaintenanceSchedule 
configurations.

We can, however, simplify the process by reducing the number of days in the future the algorithm must search for

> coinciding permissive windows. 1000 days is a proposed cut-off.

Author: Within a single changeManagement, yes. However, the hierarchy applies. It is possible to have one RRULE which complies with the 2 year constraint in `ClusterVersion` and a separate / different RRULE in `MachineConfigPool` which also complies.
Combined, however, these could align only on the 999th day. The 2 year limitation is there as a sanity check and to encourage reasonable choices. The 1000 day scan is a limit on how far we will play along with bad choices. I wanted this value to be sufficiently greater than 2 years to make clear, in metrics (e.g. `cm_change_remaining`), that we were not just on the cusp of a valid two year maintenance schedule -- we were well beyond it and into invalid ranges.

to iteratively find permissive windows at the cluster / control-plane level. These can be added to an 
[interval-tree](https://github.com/rdleal/intervalst) . As dates are added, rrule calculations for the worker-nodes
can be performed. The interval-tree should be able to efficiently determine whether there is an
intersection between the permissive intervals it has stored for the control-plane and the time range tested for the 
worker-nodes.

Since it is possible there is no overlap, limits must be placed on this search. Once dates >1000 days from
the present moment are being tested, the operator can behave as if the next window will occur in
1000 days (prevents infinite search for overlap).

This outcome does not need to be recomputed unless the operator restarts Or one of the RRULE involved
is modified.

If an overlap _is_ found, no additional intervals need to be added to the tree and it can be discarded.
The operator can store the start & end datetimes for the overlap and count down the seconds remaining 
until it occurs. Obviously, this calculation must be repeated:
1. If either MaintenanceSchedule configuration is updated.

> 1. The operator is restarted.

Author: Yes. I expected the operator to re-compute the interval tree each time the binary was invoked. The next permissive window start time would be kept in memory in order to help rapidly calculate metrics like `cm_change_eta` and inform when exactly to initiate change.

> 1. The operator is restarted.

Reviewer 7: Right, that makes sense. Calculate the next window, and the rule details against the name of the change management CR, if the thing gets restarted or the rule details change, invalidate cache and start again, cool, SGTM

it is risky to impose a single opinionated workflow onto the wide variety of consumers of the platform. The workflows
described in this enhancement are not intended to be exotic or contrived but situations in which flexibility
in our configuration can achieve real world, reasonable goals. 

`disabledUntil` is designed to support our Service Delivery team who, on occasion, will need
to be able to bypass configured change controls. The feature is easy to use, does not require 
deleting or restoring customer configuration (which may be error-prone), and can be safely 
"forgotten" after being set to a date in the future.

`pausedUntil`, among other interesting possibilities, offers a cluster lifecycle administrator the ability
to stop a problematic update from unfolding further. You may have watched a 100 node
cluster roll out a bad configuration change without knowing exactly how to stop the damage
without causing further disruption. This is not a moment when you want to be figuring out how to format
a date string, calculating timezones, or copying around cluster configuration so that you can restore

> it after you stop the bleeding.

Reviewer 7: I've got nearly 1200 lines into this EP and only just worked out the difference between these. Perhaps I missed it earlier, but may want to make this clearer up top somewhere.

I also think reviewing the names might be worthwhile, naming is hard but I find the names aren't different enough right now to make it obvious what the use cases are

Author: arrg.. Sorry. Yep. `disabled` is a reference to whether change management is being enforced. `paused` is talking about reconciliation processes and named after the existing HyperShift API.

Reviewer 7: Might just be worth adding a detailed description near the introduction of the two terms near the front of the document so other readers get that understanding earlier

Author: Added `Definitions and Reference` section: https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1571/commits/ec9eee7d34fea72352fee695704cc598a5e5e8c1#diff-1ff326e1e96737c91e17f11d7852c3a9e3510415ea04892601c31a867e6eb706R60 .

well. However, these customers may still benefit significantly from the change management concept --
unexpected / disruptive worker node drains and reboots have bitten even experienced OpenShift operators
(e.g. a new MachineConfig being contributed via gitops).

These strategies inform decision-making through metrics and provide facilities for fine-grained control 
over exactly when material change is rolled out to a cluster. 

The Assisted strategy is also specifically designed to provide a foundation for 
the forthcoming `oc adm update worker-nodes` verbs. After separating the control-plane and
worker-node update phases, these verbs are intended to provide cluster lifecycle administrators the 
ability to easily start, pause, cancel, and even rollback worker-node changes.

Making accommodations for these strategies should be a subset of the overall implementation
of the MaintenanceSchedule strategy and they will enable a foundation for a range of 
different persons not served by MaintenanceSchedule.

### Use CRON instead of RRULE
The CRON specification is typically used to describe when something should start and 

> does not imply when things should end. CRON also cannot, in a standard way,

Reviewer 7: I thought we were excluding the ability to specify an end date in RRULE anyway?

Author: I should probably add to the deciding factors "it is not as expressive" (e.g. cron cannot express "last Sunday of the month"). But you bring up a good point that deserves clarification. Here, "end" refers to the closing of a permissive window.  `*/5 * * * *` means invoke something every 5 minutes (immaterial of when the task finishes). We'd need to contort this to mean "unpaused for the duration of every 5th minute". 

The RRULE restriction you mention refers to  "end" as in "the schedule no longer applies after a (date X | X repititions)". For example, in google calendar, you can schedule a reoccurring meeting that only reoccurs for 6 weeks. The schedule ends / is irrelevant, after those 6 weeks.
I did not see a use case for allowing such an "end" to be configured since it seemed at odds to keeping a cluster secure.

Reviewer 7: How are the permissive windows reflected in RRULE, it has a similar problem to cron no? It's about when to trigger but doesn't specify a duration for the window?

Author: RRULE selects days. That provides a intuitive (default) 24h bound for start and stop time. The EP allows for further refinement of this with intra-day `startTime` and `duration`.

Author: You could pair a `duration`-like concept with cron, but you are back to contortions: `* 20-23 * * *` might be a natural first attempt at saying "changes are ok between 20:00 and 23:59" each day; what is duration supposed to be?
If I was trying to make it work, I'd say duration defaults to 0 and only times selected by the cron apply. If duration is non-zero, it implies the changes can continue on after the cron stops selecting the time. So if you set duration=1h with `* 20-23 * * *`, that actually implies "20:00 to 1:59" the next day.
cron=`* 20-23 * * *` with duration=0 could then also be expressed as cron=`0 20 * * *`, duration=4h. If you messed up with cron=`* 20 * * *`, duration=4h, your total duration would be 5h. 

Playing around with potential misfires on a simple scenario like "permit updates all day Sunday".
- duration=24h, cron=`* * * * Sun` -- enjoy your Monday updates!
- duration=24h, cron=`0 * * * Sun` -- enjoy your Monday updates!
- duration=24h, cron=`* 0-23 * * Sun` -- enjoy your Monday updates!
- duration=0, cron=`0 0 * * Sun` -- hope your updates can complete in 1 minute!
- duration=0, cron=`* 0 * * Sun` -- nope, that's an hour on Sunday
- duration=0, cron=`0 0-23 * * Sun` -- nope, that's 24 non-contiguous minutes on Sunday
- duration=24h, cron=`0 0 * * Sun` -- success!
- duration=0, cron=`* * * * Sun` -- success!

I find it very difficult to reason about. 

If I try to play the same game with RRULE malfeasance in this EP. An off the shelf tool tells the user `FREQ=WEEKLY;INTERVAL=1;BYDAY=SU`
- No other options set? -- success!
- duration=24h -- success!
- startTime=00:00 -- success!
- startTime=00:00, duration=24h -- success!

Reviewer 7: Well that's a fantastic argument for not using cron 😅 

If the API we are exposing only allows selecting particular days I think that simplifies things significantly for us. Do end users care about specific sub day timing? Eg would they want it to be in their normal waking hours? Is that something we are willing to support?

Reviewer 7: Right, so we are saying that users will specify an RRULE, a start time and a duration, that makes me lean even more towards breaking the API for RRULE down into something Kube native tbh. Will come up with something

> express common semantics like "The first Saturday of every month."

Reviewer 7: How would you do this with RRULE?

Author: `FREQ=Monthly;BYDAY=Sa;BYSETPOS=-1,1;`

Reviewer 7: May be worth including as an example in the body

Author: Adding in next push in a new section that introduces terminology early.

### Use a separate CRD instead of updating ClusterVersion, MCP, ...
In this alternative, we introduce a CRD separate from ClusterVersion, MCP, HostedCluster, and NodePool. For example
an independent `UpdatePolicy` CRD where administrator preferences can be captured. This approach [was explored](https://github.com/jupierce/oc-update-design-ideas/commit/a6364ee2f2c1ebf84ed6d50bc277f9736bf793bd). 
Ultimately, it felt less intuitive across profiles. Consider a CRD called `UpdatePolicy` that tries to be a central config.

> 1. Is it namespaced? If it is, that feels odd for an object that that should control the cluster. If it is not namespaced, the policy feels misplaced for HCP HostedCluster resources which live in a namespace.

Reviewer 7: How does this work for MachineConfig in HCP, since they make sense to be cluster scoped, but not in the case of HCP? This feels the same

Author: MachineConfigs serialized as configmaps in the hosted cluster namespace: https://hypershift-docs.netlify.app/how-to/automated-machine-management/configure-machines/ .

Reviewer 7: Eww 😅 

I was expecting there to be a XYZ and a ClusterXYZ where XYZ is for managing the cluster you're on and ClusterXYZ is for managing guest clusters and is namespaced, naming could be confusing though 🤔

> 1. Where does someone check the status of the policy (e.g. when the next update is going to be possible on a given MCP?). If it is the UpdatePolicy object, you have multiple independent controllers controlling the status, which is an antipattern. If the UpdatePolicy controls multiple different MCPs differently, how do they independently report their status'? It also introduces the problem of having to look at multiple places (MCP and UpdatePolicy to understand what may be happening.

Reviewer 7: You would have separate parts of the status owned by different places, with hints from the referring objects about the state. The policy itself would govern only whether it was currently blocking or not, the MCP or CV would then interpret that and determine what that means for it

> 1. As you pack policies for control-plane, MCPs, HCP primitives into an expressive UpdatePolicy, the schema options varied from too complex, to error prone, to overly abstract, to overly limiting.

Reviewer 7: I feel like I need to read the other version of this EP now... A next week problem

> 1. If you split the policy object up to simplify it, e.g. one for each MCP, you have the problem of associating it to the right MCP unambiguously. Planting the policy in the MCP itself solves this problem.

Reviewer 7: Object reference no?

Reviewer 7: Having read the other EP, I see why you rejected it.

You had the binding direction the opposite way to what I'm suggesting.

So the update policy selected which objects it applied to. I think that was adding a lot of complexity and made it undesirable for you.

If instead the object itself, lets say MCP, selected the policy via a name or via a labelSelector, then it becomes very easy to match unambiguously, and to also be able to share the policies.

If we went down the label selector route, you'd have to consider the question of "What if I add a new UpdatePolicy that is selected by the selector", but, that's a common issue since label selectors are widely used

| `null`/`false` | `null` | `null`  | Permissive indefinitely           |
| `true`         | *      | *       | Paused indefinitely |
| `null`/`false` | set    | `null`  | Permissive during reoccurring windows time. Paused at all other times.                                                                                                                  |
| `null`/`false` | set    | set     | Permissive during reoccurring windows time modulo excluded date ranges during which it is paused. Paused at all other times.                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| `null`/`false` | `null` | set     | Permissive except during excluded dates during which it is paused.                                                                                                                             |
| date           | *      | *       | Honor permit and exclude values, but only after the specified date. For example, permit: `null` and exclude: `null` implies the strategy is indefinitely permissive after the specified date. |

> #### MachineConfigPool Assisted Strategy Configuration

Reviewer 2: Not seeing where a forced drain would be configured.  In a managed context we need have this as an option, if only for our own clusters.  We can decide what default value to use (today it is 1 hour I believe).

Author: Forced drain is a separate EP that I hope will also reduce MUO: https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1616 .

7. Do not subvert expectations of customers well served by the existing fully self-managed cluster update.
8. Ensure the architectural space for enabling different change management strategies in the future. 

### Non-Goals

1. Allowing control-plane upgrades to be paused midway through an update. Control-plane updates are relatively rapid and pausing will introduce unnecessary complexity and risk. 
2. Requiring the use of maintenance schedules for OpenShift upgrades (the changes should be compatible with various upgrade methodologies – including being manually triggered).
3. Allowing Standalone worker-nodes to upgrade to a different payload version than the control-plane (this is supported in HCP, but is not a goal for standalone).
4. Exposing maintenance schedule controls from the oc CLI. This may be a future goal but is not required by this enhancement.
5. Providing strict promises around the exact timing of upgrade processes. Maintenance schedules will be honored to a reasonable extent (e.g. upgrade actions will only be initiated during a window), but long-running operations may exceed the configured end of a maintenance schedule.

> 6. Implementing logic to defend against impractical maintenance schedules (e.g. if a customer configures a 1-second maintenance schedule every year). Service Delivery may want to implement such logic to ensure upgrade progress can be made.

Author: +1. Added.

  disable change management constraints (e.g. if it is critical to roll out a fix) and a method that
  does not need to be reverted (i.e. it will naturally expire after the specified date and the configured
  change management strategy will re-activate).
- `changeManagement.pausedUntil: "<bool|date>"`: Unless the effective active strategy is Disabled, `pausedUntil: "true"` or `pausedUntil: "<future-date>"`, change management must 
  pause material changes.

### Change Management Status
Change Management information will also be reflected in resource status. Each resource 
which contains the stanza in its `spec` will expose its current impact in its `status`. 
Common user interfaces for aggregating and displaying progress of these underlying resources
should be updated to proxy that status information to the end users.

### Change Management Metrics
Cluster wide change management information will be made available through cluster metrics. Each resource
containing the stanza must expose the following metrics:
- Whether any change management strategy is enabled.

> - Which change management strategy is enabled. This can be used not notify SRE when a cluster begins using a non-standard strategy (e.g. during emergency corrective action).

Author: Yep. Thanks. Next push.

8. The CVO sets a metric indicating that changes are pending for ClusterVersion. Irrespective of pending changes, the CVO also exposes a 
   metric indicating the number of seconds until the next window in which material changes can be initiated.
9. Since MachineConfigs likely do not match in the desired update and the current manifests (RHCOS changes occur 100% of the time for non-hotfix updates), 
   the CVO also sets a metric indicating that MachineConfig changes are pending. This is an assumption, but the price of being wrong
   on rare occasions is very low (pending changes will be reported, but disappear shortly after a permissive window begins).
   This is done because the MachineConfigOperator (MCO) cannot anticipate the coming manifest changes and cannot,
   therefore, reflect expected changes to the worker-node MCPs. Anticipating this change ahead of time is necessary for an operations
   team to be able to set an alert with the semantics (worker-node-update changes are pending & time remaining until changes are permitted < 2d).
   The MCO will expose its own metric for changes pending when manifests are updated. But this metric will only indicate when 

>    there are machines in the pool that have not achieved the desired configuration. An operations team trying to implement the 2d 

Author: Current text is advocating for CVO to make that assumption:
> This is an assumption, but the price of being wrong on rare occasions is very low.

Is that a 95% a concern?

>    there are machines in the pool that have not achieved the desired configuration. An operations team trying to implement the 2d 

Reviewer 8: I think like we assessed earlier, this should in practice almost always be a change.

I guess the CVO could pre-process the payload and check the OS image hash + MCO image hash, and if both match, there should be no changes, but I'm not sure if that's worth the effort

they wish to differentiate these phases.

Users well served by the fully self-managed update experience can disable 
change management (i.e. not set an enforced maintenance schedule), specifying
that control-plane and worker node updates can take place at
any time. Users who need more control may choose to update their control-plane
regularly (e.g. to patch CVEs) with a permissive change management configuration
for the control-plane while using a tight maintenance schedule for worker-nodes
to only update during specific, low utilization, periods.

Since separating the node update phases is such an important driver for
Maintenance Schedules, their motivations are heavily intertwined. The remainder of this 
section, therefore, delves into the motivation for this separation. 

#### The Case for Control-Plane and Worker-Node Separation
From an overall platform perspective, we believe it is important to drive a distinction
between updates of the control-plane and worker-nodes. Currently, an update is initiated
and OpenShift's ostensibly fully self-managed update mechanics take over (CVO laying
out new manifests, cluster operators rolling out new operands, etc.) culminating with 

> worker-nodes being drained a rebooted by the machine-config-operator (MCO) to align

Author: Happy to add that if you have a phrasing suggestion.

> worker-nodes being drained a rebooted by the machine-config-operator (MCO) to align

Reviewer 8: I think it's fine for the purposes of the enhancement, just wanted to clarify that mostly

them with the version of OpenShift running on the control-plane.

This approach has proven extraordinarily successful in providing a fast and reliable 
control-plane update, but, in rare cases, the highly opinionated update process leads
to less than ideal outcomes. 

##### Node Update Separation to Address Problems in User Perception
Our success in making OpenShift control-plane updates reliable, exhaustive focus on quality aside,
is also made possible by the platform's exclusive ownership of the workloads that run on the control-plane 

> nodes. Worker-nodes, on the other hand, run an endless variety of non-platform, user defined workloads - many of

Author: Yes - that's a great point. Adding a note in the topology section in the next push:
> These toplogies do not have worker nodes. Only the ClusterVersion change management policy will be relevant.
There is no logical distinction between user workloads and control-plane workloads in this case. A control-plane
update will drain user workloads and will cause workload disruption.

concepts of control-plane vs worker-node updates in Standalone environments since one implies the other.

In short (details will follow in the implementation section), the assisted strategy allows users to specify the
exact rendered [`desiredConfig` the MachineConfigPool](https://github.com/openshift/machine-config-operator/blob/5112d4f8e562a2b072106f0336aeab451341d7dc/docs/MachineConfigDaemon.md#coordinating-updates) should be advertising to the MachineConfigDaemon on
nodes it is associated with. Like the `MaintenanceSchedule` strategy, it also respects the `pausedUntil`
field.

#### Manual Strategy - MachineConfigPool
Minimally, this strategy will be supported by MachineConfigPool. If and when the strategy is supported by other
change management capable resources, the configuration schema for the policy may differ as the details of
what constitutes and informs change varies between resources. 

Like the Assisted strategy, this strategy is implemented to support the conceptual and technical separation
of control-plane and worker-nodes. The MachineConfigPool Manual strategy allows users to explicitly specify

> their `desiredConfig` to be used for ignition of new and rebooting nodes. While the Manual strategy is enabled,

Reviewer 8: Is the expectation that if the user chooses to do this, that they would be responsible for selecting the correct rendered config?

Author: That is the expectation, with the caveat that "correct" is up to the user as long as it is a rendered and appropriate MachineConfig for the MCP.

Author: That is the expectation, with the caveat that "correct" is up to the user as long as it is a rendered and appropriate MachineConfig for the MCP.

    the time at which the next material changes can be initiated according to the maintenance schedule.
18. On the first Saturday of the next month, 00:00 UTC, the MCO determines that material changes are permitted.
    Based on limits like maxUnavailable, the MCO begins to annotate nodes with the desiredConfiguration. The 
    MachineConfigDaemon takes over from there, draining, and rebooting nodes into the updated release.
19. There are a large number of nodes in the cluster and this process continues for more than 24 hours. On Saturday
    23:59, the MCO applies a round of desired configurations annotations to Nodes. At 00:00 on Sunday, it detects
    that material changes can no longer be initiated, and pauses its activity. Node updates that have already
    been initiated continue beyond the maintenance schedule window.
20. Since not all nodes have been updated, the MCO continues to expose a metric informing the system of
    pending changes.
21. In the subsequent days, the cluster is scaled up to handle additional workload. The new nodes receive
    the most recent, desired configuration.    

> 22. On the first Saturday of the next month, the MCO resumes its work. In order to ensure that forward progress is

Reviewer 8: Curious what you mean here by oldest config. Technically there's no guarantee that an older timestamped configuration is an older desired configuration.

As an example, if you add a file entry, and then delete it, the add will create a new render, but the delete will not, since it goes back to the exact version. I guess in practice using timestamps is probably sufficient for anything we would care about (and realistically for maint. window ocp versioned updates, we should never go back to a previous render), so maybe this isn't really a concern.

Author: Interesting. I was assuming any change would create a new render and that timestamps could be used. Adding a subtle note here: "oldest among the rendered configuration of nodes requiring a change". That way, if you do have an old configuration that somehow again becomes the desired configuration, there is clearly no mandate to update nodes running that "old" configuration first.
For MCO's sanity though, always rendering a new config might be easier to reason about.

    made for all nodes, the MCO will update nodes that have the oldest current configuration first. This ensures
    that even if the desired configuration has changed multiple times while maintenance was not permitted,
    no nodes are starved of updates. Consider the alternative where (a) worker-node updates required > 24h,

>     (b) updates to nodes are performed alphabetically, and (c) MachineConfigs are frequently being changed

Reviewer 8: If the maint. windows were small enough, and changes often enough, I guess it's conceivable you end up with say, 10 worker nodes on 10 different versions, and you never have a completely consistent pool.

I guess version skew guards will prevent any of these from actually failing, but we should probably report status such that a user can understand that thats going on.

Author: That is a potential outcome. As you suggest, I don't think it is dangerous as long as we have skew control.

Reviewer 7: Assuming a new version comes along later, v3, will the MCO recognise that 10 are on v1, 10 are on v2, and update those on v1 first, or will it be random? Then you might end up with a mix of v1, v2 and v3?

What is our reporting like for understanding which version a Node is on? I could imagine a situation where we get a bug and the customers says yes, cluster is on version X.Y.Z, and we can see a bug there that was fixed in say X.Y.Z-1, but their nodes are mixed across several versions prior to that, how do we make it clear that the node that broke in this instance is on an unpatched release and therefore the customer needs to upgrade to fix the bug?

And that said, what if there's a change that affects the rendered config, that also relies on controllers being updated, or vice versa, how do we handle skew there 🤔

Author: > and update those on v1 first, or will it be random?

It will always update the nodes with the oldest configuration first. You could still end up with 3 or more different versions if you regularly interrupting the roll-out.

> What is our reporting like for understanding which version a Node is on?

You can get a sense of progress by looking at the MCP's progress. It lists how many nodes aren't up-to-date yet. If you wanted deeper insight, I believe it would require looking at the Node resources.

> And that said, what if there's a change that affects the rendered config, that also relies on controllers being updated, or vice versa, how do we handle skew there

Controllers must already be able to handle skew (supported skew isn't increased by this proposal, but it will probably become more common in the wild). For the control-plane, where we might have increased concern about skew scenarios, a control-plane update is treated as a single material change, so we would not end up with several different versions on control-plane nodes.

1. At 19:00 Eastern, the pending changes begin to be initiated. This rollout abides by documented OpenShift constraints
   such as the MachineConfigPool `maxUnavailable` setting.
   
#### On-prem Standalone Manual Strategy Scenario
1. A small, business critical cluster is being run on-prem.
1. There are no reoccurring windows of time when the cluster lifecycle administrator can tolerate downtime.
   Instead, updates are negotiated and planned far in advance. 
1. The cluster workloads are not HA and unplanned drains are considered a business risk.
1. To prevent surprises, the cluster lifecycle administrator sets the Manual strategy on the worker MCP.
1. Given the sensitivity of the operation, the lifecycle administrator wants to manually drain and reboot
   nodes to accomplish the update.
1. The cluster lifecycle administrator sends a company-wide notice about the period during which service may be disrupted.
1. The user determines the most recent rendered worker configuration. They configure the `manual` change
   management policy to use that exact configuration as the `desiredConfig`. 

> 1. The MCO is thus being asked to ignite any new node or rebooted node with the desired configuration, but it

Reviewer 8: The MCO logic today dictates that there must be at least 1 node that's upgraded to the latest version, before any new nodes will ignite into it directly. I assume that needs to change for this?

Author: For both manual and assisted, the proposal would say "desired config (version)" (as declared in the MCP) vs "latest version" (whatever might have rendered most recently).
If we apply the question to the "desired config", I think the **manual** strategy would indeed change that behavior (new nodes would ignite with the desired config even if they were the first. That ensures that the administrator has a fixed set of nodes they need to manually reboot after making the MCP change.
For the **assisted** strategy, I would be OK with maintaining the current behavior. Since it is a semi-automated process, the administrator would likely not even notice if a new node came up within the validation window. I'll add notes on this.

   such as the MachineConfigPool `maxUnavailable` setting.
1. Though new rendered configurations may be created, the assisted strategy will not act until the assisted policy
   is updated to permit a more recent creation date.
   
### API Extensions

API Extensions are CRDs, admission and conversion webhooks, aggregated API servers,
and finalizers, i.e. those mechanisms that change the OCP API surface and behaviour.

- Name the API extensions this enhancement adds or modifies.
- Does this enhancement modify the behaviour of existing resources, especially those owned
  by other parties than the authoring team (including upstream resources), and, if yes, how?
  Please add those other parties as reviewers to the enhancement.

  Examples:
  - Adds a finalizer to namespaces. Namespace cannot be deleted without our controller running.
  - Restricts the label format for objects to X.
  - Defaults field Y on object kind Z.

Fill in the operational impact of these API Extensions in the "Operational Aspects
of API Extensions" section.

### Topology Considerations

#### Hypershift / Hosted Control Planes

> In the HCP topology, the HostedCluster and NodePool resources are enhanced to support the change management strategies

Reviewer 8: I would like to call out that:
1. HCP has both replace and inplace upgrade nodepools, and while that shouldn't matter for maint. schedule, they do upgrade differently, and
2. HCP differs from standalone in cert management, where the certs there will trigger creation of new nodes, and no rotation will happen if the upgrades are paused (due to a maint. schedule), so you run more risk of certs expiring down the line (although I don't know if they actually have certificate rotation handling for all certs today)

    description: "Human readable message explaining how strategies & configuration are resulting in the effective state."
    # The start of the next permissive window, taking into account the hierarchy. "N/A" for indefinite pause.
    permitChangesETA: <datetime>
    changesPending: <Yes|No>
```

#### Change Management Bypass Annotation
In some situations, it may be necessary for a MachineConfig to be applied regardless of the active change
management policy for a MachineConfigPool. In such cases, `machineconfiguration.openshift.io/bypass-change-management`
can be set to any non-empty string. The MCO will progress until MCPs which select annotated
MachineConfigs have all machines running with a desiredConfig containing that MachineConfig's current state.

This annotation will be present on `00-master` to ensure that, once the CVO updates the MachineConfig,
the remainder of the control-plane update will be treated as a single material change.

### Special Handling

#### Change Management on Master MachineConfigPool
In order to allow control-plane updates as a single material change, the MCO will only honor change the management configuration for the 

> master MachineConfigPool if user generated MachineConfigs are the cause for a pending change. To accomplish this, 

Reviewer 8: We don't really have a mechanism for this today, since all configuration change calculations are done via rendered ones, and we just do a merge of all base configs.

I'm not sure I fully understand this section. Basically any pool-level configurations on the master pool are allowed the same way as worker, but they aren't honored if there's an incoming upgrade? But any user changes turn us back into worker calculation? (where the CVO level maint. schedule and the master pool are union'ed?)

Author: @yuqi-zhang - sorry I somehow missed this in my comment sweep. I've updated this section to be clearer.

leave unpatched CVEs on worker-nodes much longer than necessary. It will also eventually lead to
the need to resolve version skew (Upgradeable=False will be reported by the API cluster operator).

Service Delivery understands that exposing the full range of options to cluster
lifecycle administrators could dramatically increase the overhead of managing their fleet. To
prevent this outcome, Service Delivery will only expose a subset of the change management
strategies. They will also implement sanitization of the configuration options a user can
supply to those strategies. For example, a simplified interface in OCM for building a
limited range of RRULEs that are compliant with Service Delivery's update policies.

#### Node Disruption Policy
https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1525 describes the addition of `nodeDisruptionPolicy`
to `MachineConfiguration`. Through this configuration, an administrator can convey that
a configuration should not trigger a node to be rebooted.

When `nodeDisruptionPolicy` indicates that a `MachineConfiguration` should not trigger
a node reboot, it becomes a non-material change from the perspective of a maintenance

> schedule. In other words, it can be applied immediately, even outside a permissive window.

Reviewer 8: I don't think that's safe, since disruption is not just reboots, but also node drains, etc. all of which you can specify via the policy. Besides, the MCO isn't that granular that it can break down a subset of MC changes to happen.

I think node disruption policy should only define how a change is acted on, but otherwise is gated by the maint. schedule like everyone else.

Author: I've made this change in the next push.

> ### Risks and Mitigations

Reviewer 8: I'd also like to double check how we manage slow updates/half updated pools vs blocked upgrades/failing nodes, etc.

It reads to me that we'll have to reconsider how we do status calculation with the new window, since half-upgraded pools will become the norm, which means we'll have to figure out how/when/what we consider errors, and add extra pool status/operator status to reflect some of this

   take effect only when permitted by the customer's change management preferences.
1. Do not subvert expectations of customers well served by the existing fully self-managed cluster update.
1. Ensure the architectural space for enabling different change management strategies in the future.
1. Directly support the strategic separation of control-plane and worker-node update phases by empowering cluster 
   lifecycle administrators with change management strategies that provide them fine-grained control over exactly
   when and how worker-nodes are updated to a desired configuration even if no regular maintenance schedule is possible.
   
### Non-Goals

1. Allowing control-plane upgrades to be paused midway through an update. Control-plane updates are relatively rapid 
   and pausing will introduce unnecessary complexity and risk. 
1. Requiring the use of maintenance schedules for OpenShift upgrades (the changes should be compatible with various 
   upgrade methodologies – including being manually triggered).
1. Allowing Standalone worker-nodes to upgrade to a different payload version than the control-plane 
   (this is supported in HCP, but is not a goal for standalone).

> 1. Exposing maintenance schedule controls from the oc CLI. This may be a future goal but is not required by this enhancement.

Author: Yes, exactly. A series of subverbs under `oc adm update` have been proposed for OTA: https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1BtVSGWaG6LD0qye9BHPU5ssnEYTGPOlhHeogFfECUnk/edit#slide=id.g25513f80e3d_0_572 .

1. Providing strict promises around the exact timing of upgrade processes. Maintenance schedules will be honored to a 
   reasonable extent (e.g. upgrade actions will only be initiated during a window), but long-running operations may 
   exceed the configured end of a maintenance schedule.
1. Implementing logic to defend against impractical maintenance schedules (e.g. if a customer configures a 1-second 
   maintenance schedule every year). Service Delivery may want to implement such logic to ensure upgrade progress can 
   be made.
1. Automatically initiating updates to `ClusterVersion`. This will still occur through external actors/orchestration. 
   Maintenance schedules simply give the assurance that changes to `ClusterVersion` will not result in material changes 
   until permitted by the defined maintenance schedules.

## Proposal

### Change Management Overview

> Establish a new namespaced Custom Resource Definition (CRD) called `ChangeManagementPolicy` which allows cluster lifecycle

Author: Yes, they are on the management side for HCP and that drove the namespace decision. Adding a note to this effect in the next push.

administrators to capture their requirements for when resource(s) associated with the policy can initiate material 
changes on the cluster.

Add a `changeManagement` stanza to several existing resources in the OpenShift ecosystem which can reference

> the new `ChangeManagementPolicy` resource to restrict when and how their associated controllers can initiate

Author: Described a bit later - manageable resources can refer to only one policy. Permitting multiple means returning to the non-deterministic calculation of overlapping intervals. Something I'm happy to avoid with a single policy.

- Standalone's `MachineConfigPool`. Honored by Machine Config Operator.

Changes that are not allowed to be initiated due to a change management policy will be 
called "pending". Controllers responsible for initiating pending changes will await a permissive window 
according to each resource's relevant `changeManagement` configuration.

In additional to "policies", different resource kinds may offer additional knobs in their `changeManagement`
stanzas to provide cluster lifecycle administrators additional control over the exact nature of 
the changes desired by the resource's associated controller. For example, in `MachineConfigPool`'s 
`changeManagement` stanza, a cluster lifecycle administrator will be able to (optionally) specify the 
exact rendered configuration the controller should be working towards (during the next permissive window) vs
the traditional OpenShift model where the "latest" rendered configuration is always the destination. 

### ChangeManagementPolicy Resource

```yaml
kind: ChangeManagementPolicy
metdata:
  # ChangeManagementPolicies are namespaced resources. They will normally reside in the 

>   # namespace associated with the controller initiating material changes. 

Author: The actor would be namespaced for HCP. So unless we want to have a namespaced (`HostedChangeManagementPolicy`?) and non-namespaced version of the CRD, namespaced was my compromise.

>   # namespace associated with the controller initiating material changes. 

Reviewer 7: A separate, namespace scoped version could be achievable, it may require some tooling improvements to make it easier to manage, but, nothing is impossible right?

>   # namespace associated with the controller initiating material changes. 

Reviewer 9: > you will need a different set of fields for the HCP use vs OCP use
Anything more on how the fields would be different? This is just the policy definition right?

>   # namespace associated with the controller initiating material changes. 

Reviewer 7: So typically this would be to do with references, if the resource references a secret, or a configmap, or some other object, typically a namespaced resource does not include a namespace field in the reference, as the referenced object must always be in the same namespace. For a cluster scoped, you have to specify the namespace.

In this API, it's different though. We don't have any namespaced references inside the API itself, so it would be the same spec and status needed, vis-a-vis some minor documentation differences.

The issue though is on the binding side. At the moment, the expectation is that the binding is by referencing the `ChangeManagementPolicy` from objects like `MachineConfig`, which is cluster scoped. So what do we do with that reference?

It would be the one that needed to be different, at which point, we are creating way too much complexity IMO.

How does HCP handle machineconfigs anyway? Are they in the management cluster? They are cluster scoped traditionally so how do they separate the different machine configs to each guest cluster?

>   # namespace associated with the controller initiating material changes. 

Author: Thanks @JoelSpeed - I've separated `HostedChangeManagementPolicy` (namespaced and for NodePool/HostedCluster) and cluster scoped `ChangeManagementPolicy` (for anything internal to the cluster on which the resource is defined).

  # For example, in Standalone namespace/openshift-machine-config for the MCO and 
  # namespace/openshift-cluster-version for the CVO. 
  # For HCP, the ChangeManagementPolicies for will reside in the same namespace as the 
  # HostedCluster resource.
  # This namespace can be overridden in resources being constrained by a ChangeManagementPolicy
  # but RBAC for the resource's controller must permit reading the object from the non-default 
  # namespace.
  namespace: openshift-machine-config
  name: example-policy

spec:
  # Supported strategy overview:
  # Permissive:

>   #   Always permissive - allows material changes.

Author: Elaborated in the next push.

  # Restrictive:
  #   Always restrictive - pauses material changes.
  # MaintenanceSchedule: 
  #   An RRULE and other fields will be used to specify reoccurring permissive windows
  #   as well as any special exclusion periods.
  strategy: Permissive|Restrictive|MaintenanceSchedule

  # Difference strategies expose a configuration
  # stanza that further informs their behavior.
  maintenanceSchedule:    
    permit:
      ...
  
# A new ChangeManagementPolicy controller will update the status field so that
# other controllers, attempting to abide by change management, can easily 
# determine whether they can initiate material changes.
status:
  # Seconds remaining until changes permitted. 0 means changes
  # are currently permitted.
  # nil IF pausedUntil: true  OR  not "Ready".

>   nextPermissiveETA: 0

Author: I've changed this to duration for legibility.

### Resources Supporting Change Management

Resources which support a reference to a `ChangeManagementPolicy` are said to support change management.
Resources which support change management will implement a `spec.changeManagement` stanza. These stanzas
must support AT LEAST the following fields:

#### ChangeManagement Stanzas
```yaml
kind: ClusterVersion|MachineConfigPool|HostedCluster|NodePool
spec:
  changeManagement:
    # If set to "true" or a future date (represented as string), the effective change 
    # management strategy is Disabled and the window is permissive. 
    # Date must be RFC3339.
    # When disabled with this field, all other values of changeManagement are ignored.
    # This field is modeled on HCP's existing HostedCluster.spec.pausedUntil which uses a string. 
    disabledUntil: <datetime|bool>str
    
    # If set to "true" or a future date (represented as string), the strategy will be
    # paused (not permissive) unless overridden by disabledUntil. If paused with this 
    # setting, it overrides the "policy" stanza.
    # Date must be RFC3339. 
    # This field is modeled on HCP's existing HostedCluster.spec.pausedUntil which uses a string. 

>     pausedUntil: <datetime|bool>str  

Reviewer 3: This makes sense to me and simplifies configuration for the user IMO

>     pausedUntil: <datetime|bool>str  

Author: I can make that change. `pausedUntil` is out in the ecosystem, but we don't have to suffer the sins of the past. While the modes can be reduced, we lose the ability to express different intentions. `pausedUntil` and `disabledUntil` give anyone simple knobs to stop or start updates. When they expire or are cleared, things are back to the previous configuration.
With this alternative approach, you need to "know" about the cluster, which creates some operational costs. For example, there is no single `oc patch` that will always get the job done.

If SRE wants to ensure a change rolls out immediately, and the existing managed resource state=Restrictive, they can't set blindly set PermissiveUntil because there is no policy defined. Their code must set Permissive and _something_ must remember and restore that. Or, we don't have PermissiveUntil require a policy and it falls back to Restrictive when it expires and no policy is defined. In this approach, setting `PermissiveUntil` on a resource with state=Permissive does the wrong thing. It's nothing we can't code/doc/convention around, but that has its own cognitive overhead for the admins.

    # 0 if outside of a permissive window.
    # nil if changes are permitted indefinitely or policy not "Ready".
    permissiveRemaining: 3600
    
    message: "human readable summary"
    
    # Last recorded permissive window by THIS MCP (this may be different from a recently
    # configured ChangeManagementPolicy's lastPermissiveDate).
    lastPermissiveDate: <datetime>
  conditions:
  - type: ChangesPaused
    status: "True"
    message: "Details on why..."
  - type: ChangesPending
    status: "True"  
    message: "Details on what..."
```

#### Change Management Metrics
Change management information will be made available through cluster metrics. Each resource
containing the `spec.changeManagement` stanza must expose the following metrics:
- Whether any change management strategy is enabled.
- Which change management strategy is enabled. This can be used to notify SRE when a cluster begins using a 
  non-standard strategy (e.g. during emergency corrective action).
- The number of seconds until the next known permitted change window. See `change_management_next_change_eta` metric. 
  This might be used to notify an SRE team of an approaching permissive window.

> - The number of seconds until the current change window closes. See `change_management_permissive_remaining` metric.

Reviewer 9: Maybe the question is whether or not this field is for humans, I'd assume the absolute times from the RRule would be used by controllers and these fields would be used by humans?

  pending as a permissive window closes.

### Enhanced MachineConfigPool Control
The MachineConfigOperator (MCO), like any other operator, works toward eventual consistency of the system state
with state of configured resources. This behavior offers a simple user experience wherein an administrator
can make a change to a `MachineConfig` and the MCO take over rolling out that change. It will
1. Aggregate selected `MachineConfig` objects into a new "rendered" `MachineConfig` object.
1. Work through updating nodes to use the "latest" rendered `MachineConfig` associated with them. 

However, in business critical clusters, progress towards the "latest" rendered `MachineConfig` offers less control
than may be desired for some use cases. To address this, the `MachineConfigPool` resource will be extended
to include an option to declare which rendered `MachineConfig` the MachineConfigOperator should make
progress toward instead of the "latest".

```yaml
kind: MachineConfigPool
spec:
  machineConfig:
    # An administrator can identify the exact rendered MachineConfig
    # the MCO should progress towards for this MCP.

>     name: <rendered machine configuration name>

Reviewer 7: Have you considered how this plays into the MCO's existing garbage collection? How does it control which rendered configs live around still, does it ever delete them presently and what would need to change?

    
    # Validation defines when MCO will allow the use of a new
    # configuration. Default means a node must successfully use the
    # configuration before new nodes are ignited with the
    # desiredConfiguration.
    # None means no validation is necessary (new nodes will
    # immediately ignite with the configuration).

>     validation: Default

Reviewer 7: Feel like we can come up with better names than None and Default, they aren't particularly descriptive to an end user.

Maybe something like UpgradeFirst, or CanaryUpgrade 🤔

Author: How about:
```
activeAfter: CanaryUpgrade | Immediate
```

1. To comply with their company policy, the service consumer configures a maintenance schedule through OCM. 
1. Their first preference, no updates at all, is rejected by OCM policy, and they are referred to service 
   delivery documentation explaining minimum requirements. 
1. The user specifies a policy which permits control-plane changes to be initiated any time Saturday UTC on the control-plane.
1. To limit overall workload disruption, the user changes their worker-node policy to permit updates only on the **first** Saturday of each month.
1. OCM accepts the configuration.
1. OCM configures the HCP (HostedCluster/NodePool) resources via the Service Delivery Hive deployment to contain a `changeManagement` stanza 
   referring to newly created `ChanageManagementPolicy` objects using the `MaintenanceSchedule` strategy.
1. Hive creates/updates the associated HCP resources.
1. Company workloads are added to the new cluster and the cluster provides business value.
1. To leverage a new feature in OpenShift, the service consumer plans to update the minor version of the platform.

> 1. Via OCM, the service consumer requests the minor version update. They can do this at any time with confidence that the maintenance 

Reviewer 7: Do we feel we are at a point where our customers trust us to handle upgrades in a way that they can just walk away?

Author: For the control-plane, yes. For workers, no. This is driving the motivation to separate the two and allow independent maintenance schedules for each.

  For example, customers may be forced to enable permissive windows which amount to at least 6 hours a month.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

#### ChangeManagement Stanza
The `spec.changeManagement` stanza will be introduced into ClusterVersion and MachineConfigPool (for standalone profiles)
and HostedCluster and NodePool (for HCP profiles).

#### MaintenanceSchedule Strategy Configuration

When a `ChangeManagementPolicy` is defined to use the `MaintenanceSchedule` strategy,
a `maintenanceSchedule` stanza should also be provided to configure the strategy
(if it is not, the policy is functionally identical to `Restrictive`).

```yaml
kind: ChanageManagementPolicy
spec:
  strategy: MaintenanceSchedule
 
  maintenanceSchedule:
    # Specifies a reoccurring permissive window. 
    permit:  
      # RRULEs (https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5545#section-3.3.10) are commonly used 
      # for calendar management metadata. Only a subset of the RFC is supported.
      # See "RRULE Constraints" section for details.
      # If unset, all dates are permitted and only exclude constrains permissive windows.

>       recurrence: <rrule|null>

Reviewer 7: Still think we want to make a structured API that we convert into RRULE btw, it will be more native and I think we can make it intuitive and have an easier time validating the user intent and restricting what we do and don't allow, rather than exposing the entirety of RRULE

Reviewer 7: Thinking about this API a bit more, I'm not sure exactly where we want to draw the lines of what we do and don't support, but I could imagine something along the lines of a couple of layers of discriminated unions.

In particular, the structure below would mean that all fields are required (depending on discriminators), so any missing or incomplete information to work out an accurate rule would be easily relayed to the end user, and, we have a specific intent from them (ie RRULE=Yearly implying 1st day of the year, would have to be explicit here, ie a more declarative API)

We would also be able to specify individual limits on each of the intervals and appropriate doc text to explain what the interval means at each level.
```
recurrence:
  frequency: Yearly | Monthly | Weekly | Daily
  daily:
    interval: <int> # How many days should pass before the next occurrence 0 < x < 31
  weekly:
    days: [Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, ...]
    interval: <int> # How many weeks should pass before the next occurrence 0 < x < 27
  monthly:
    by: Day | Date
    date:
      dates: 
      - <int> # List of dates 0 < x < 32
      interval: <int> # How many months should pass before the next occurrence 0 < x < 12
    day:
      days:
      - week: First | Second | Third | Fourth | Fifth | Last
        day: Monday | Tuesday | Wednesday | ... | Sunday
      interval: <int> # How many months should pass before the next occurrence 0 < x < 12
  yearly:
    by: Day | Date
    date:
      dates: 
      - <int> # List of dates 0 < x < 32
      month: January | February | ... | December
    day:
      days:
      - week: First | Second | Third | Fourth | Fifth | Last
        day: Monday | Tuesday | Wednesday | ... | Sunday
      month: January | February | ... | December
```

Some real world examples

```
# Every second day
recurrence:
  frequency: Daily
  daily:
    interval: 2

# Every Saturday and Sunday
recurrence:
  frequency: Weekly
  weekly:
    days:
    - Saturday
    - Sunday
    interval: 1

# The last Monday of each month
recurrence:
  frequency: Monthly
  monthly:
    by: Day
    day:
      days:
      - day: Monday
        week: Last
      interval: 1
```

It is more verbose, but we can document and validate the user intention more easily, without caveats of "If you don't specify XYZ, this means ABC"

Author: Thanks @JoelSpeed - The latest push includes the schema for folks to review.

Reviewer 10: {code}
As RRULE: `FREQ=MONTHLY;BYDAY=MO;BYSETPOS=-1`
Through enhancement schema:
```yaml
recurrence:
  frequency: Monthly
  monthly:
    by: Day
    day:
      days:
      - day: Monday
        week: Last
      interval: 1
{code}

Is there a way to cut the redundant use of the word `day`? When I look at this, I can't help seeing  `Day day days day`

Reviewer 7: Sadly, as is the nature of very declarative APIs and discriminated unions in particular.

Perhaps being a bit more explicit about the names, `on` instead of `days`, `dayOfWeek` and `weekOfMonth` to be more explicit about what these mean
```
recurrence:
  frequency: Monthly
  monthly:
    by: Day
    day:
      on:
      - dayOfWeek: Monday
        weekOfMonth: Last
      interval: 1
```

Reviewer 10: yeah, that sounds way better to me, it's easier to understand

      # Given the identification of a date by an RRULE, at what time (always UTC) can the 
      # permissive window begin. "00:00" if unset.
      startTime: <time-of-day|null>
      # Given the identification of a date by an RRULE, after what offset from the startTime should
      # the permissive window close. This can create permissive windows within days that are not
      # identified in the RRULE. For example, recurrence="FREQ=Weekly;BYDAY=Sa;",
      # startTime="20:00", duration="8h" would permit material change initiation starting
      # each Saturday at 8pm and continuing through Sunday 4am (all times are UTC). The default
      # duration is 24:00-startTime (i.e. to the end of the day).
      duration: <duration|null>
      
    
    # Excluded date ranges override RRULE selections.
    exclude:

>     # Dates should be specified in YYYY-MM-DD. Each date is excluded from 00:00 UTC for 24 hours.

Reviewer 7: Is there any reason you'd want to exclude a window short than 24 hours, how could we model that?

Author: If it came in as an important RFE, the solution could be to change the time formats supported by `fromDate` and `toDate` to include HH:MM:SS type information. I couldn't think of a compelling use case to warrant the increased complexity. "Black Friday", "Someone is on vacation" -- lend themselves to day granularity. The day granularity is also a nod to the fact that I wanted this to be hard to get wrong. If you are going to the trouble to specify an exclude, making a mistake is probably a really bad outcome.

| `nil` | set    | set     | Permissive during reoccurring windows time modulo excluded date ranges during which it is paused. Paused at all other times.                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| `nil` | `null` | set     | Permissive except during excluded dates during which it is paused.                                                                                                                             |
| date           | *      | *       | Honor permit and exclude values, but only after the specified date. For example, permit: `null` and exclude: `null` implies the strategy is indefinitely permissive after the specified date. |
| `true`         | *      | *       | Paused/restrictive indefinitely |

#### CLI Assisted Rollout Scenarios
Once this proposal has been implemented, it is expected that `oc` will be enhanced to permit users to 
trigger assisted rollouts scenarios for worker-nodes (i.e. where they control the timing of a rollout
completely but progress is made using MCO automation). 

> `oc adm update` will be enhanced with `worker-node` subverbs to initiate and pause MCO work. 

Reviewer 7: This would cover infra nodes too? What about other classes of nodes that we define arbitrarily? How does the user break down to various MCP levels?

Author: It would cover infra. The proposed verbs act on MCPs, so a user would be able to act separately on `infra` vs other worker MCPs. If a user did want further granularity, they would move into the `Manual` realm where they are free to script drains/reboots based on any criteria.

- `0`: Material changes are not presently permitted (i.e. the cluster is outside of a permissive window). 
  Alternatively, time is not relevant to the strategy (e.g. restrictive strategy).
- `> 0`: The number seconds remaining in the current permissive change window. 

`change_management_last_change`
Labels:
- kind=ClusterVersion|MachineConfigPool|HostedCluster|NodePool
- object=<object-name>
- system=<control-plane|worker-nodes>

Value: 
- `-1`: Datetime unknown. 
- `0`: Material changes are currently permitted.
- `> 0`: The number of seconds which have elapsed since the material changes were last permitted or initiated.

`change_management_strategy_enabled`
Labels:
- kind=ClusterVersion|MachineConfigPool|HostedCluster|NodePool
- object=<object-name>
- system=<control-plane|worker-nodes>
- strategy=MaintenanceSchedule|Permissive|Restrictive

Value: 
- `0`: Change management for this resource is not subject to this enabled strategy.
- `1`: Change management for this resource is subject to this enabled strategy.

#### Change Management Bypass Annotation
In some situations, it may be necessary for a MachineConfig to be applied regardless of the active change

> management policy for a MachineConfigPool. In such cases, `machineconfiguration.openshift.io/bypass-change-management`

Reviewer 7: Does the API not already have ways to bypass the change management? Why not leverage those? Or are we now looking granularly at the MachineConfig level? I think we'll have to square that with the MCO team as I don't think that's a feature they have today

Author: There are several ways to bypass change management. This mechanism was a way to make "control-plane as a single material change" less of a snowflake (i.e. it happens as a single material change because of a standard annotation vs just being hard coded).
It also gives SRE some guarantees for critical machine config updates without having to guess at a "disabledUntil" date.

Author: > Rolling out critical machine config changes for worker nodes also is made easier with this annotation. 
Instead of, for example, trying to predict a `disabledUntil` date, an SRE/operations team can use this 
annotation to specify their goal with precision. Compare this with `disabledUntil`, which 
(a) an operations team would generally overestimate in order to ensure that updates complete and 
(b) may cause subsequent, non-critical, machine configuration changes to cause further workload disruption
(node reboots) that are unwarranted.

Reviewer 7: Given the updated APis we have, do we still need this escape hatch? I think probably not?

## Definitions and Reference

**RRULE**
RRULE, or "Recurrence Rule", is an RFC https://icalendar.org/RFC-Specifications/iCalendar-RFC-5545/
commonly used to express reoccurring windows of time. Consider a calendar invite for a meeting that
should occur on the last Friday of every month. RRULE can express this as `FREQ=MONTHLY;INTERVAL=1;BYDAY=-1FR`.
While commonly employed for calendar data interchange, it is used in this enhancement to allow users
the ability to specify maintenance schedules.
Tools for generating RRULES:
- Simple: https://icalendar.org/rrule-tool.html
- Complex: https://exontrol.com/exicalendar.jsp?config=/js#calendar

**Change Management Terminology**
This document uses specialized terms to describe the key aspects of change management. 
It is worth internalizing the meaning of these terms before reviewing sections of the document.
- "Material Change". A longer definition is provided in the Summary, but, in short, any configuration
  change a platform operator wishes to apply which would necessitate the reboot or replacement of one 
  or more nodes is considered a material change. For example, updating the control-plane version is 

>   a material change as it requires rebooting master nodes. 

Reviewer 11: Is there a differentiation between standalone and HCP needed here? If I understand correctly, a control-plane upgrade on a HCP would not require rebooting nodes specifically, but the pods for that HCP. Or am I just splitting unnecessary hairs here?

Reviewer 9: I'd consider control plane updates to be a material change whether or not it's standalone or HCP, not because pods or nodes are restarted, but because new code or config gets deployed and behavior will change. That's why we seek to be able to confine HostedControlPlane, ClusterVersion, MachineConfigPool, and NodePool updates to the permissive periods in a given schedule.

Probably splitting hairs too, but would a rolling reboot of nodes with no change be considered a material change? Maybe not for control plane nodes where things are well tuned for zero disruption, including CI tests that monitor for disruption, but user workloads are often less tolerant of rolling restarts. Either way, if initiated via `oc adm reboot-machine-config-pool` they'd both be confined to permissive windows because this actually applies a benign MachineConfig change and the MCO would observe any defined schedule.

- `changeManagement.pausedUntil: "<bool|date>"`: When `pausedUntil: "true"` or `pausedUntil: "<future-date>"`, 
  changes must be paused and the controller must stop initiating material changes. `pausedUntil` overrides
  `policy` when it suggests changes should be paused.
- `changeManagement.policy`: An optional reference to a `ChangeManagementPolicy` object. If neither `disabledUntil`
  or `pausedUntil` overrides it, the permissive or restrictive state suggested by the policy object will 
  inform the controller whether material changes can be initiated.

While fields like `disabledUntil` or `pausedUntil` may seem to add unnecessarily complexity, they provide
simple to use knobs for SRE and cluster lifecycle administrators to confidently undertake sensitive actions. 
For example, 
- If SRE needs to apply emergency corrective action on a cluster with a `MaintenanceSchedule` change
  management strategy configured, they can simply set `disabledUntil: <tomorrow>` without having to 
  change object references OR worry about follow-up corrective actions to restore a previous policy.
- If the cluster lifecycle administrator needs to urgently stop a problematic update, they can set

>   `pausedUntil: true` until issues are fully understood. In a scenario impacting business critical 

Reviewer 10: From the names `disabledUntil` and `pausedUntil`, it is not clear what each of them actually disables or pauses. The terms "disable" and "pause" are too similar and insinuate that `disable` is the stronger version of `pause`; however, for this proposal, they would be the exact opposite operation.

With the current naming scheme, I could easily see an admin who wants to set `pausedUntil: true` because they urgently want to stop a problematic update. Instead, they confuse the 2 terms, and set `disabledUntil: true` which effectively does the exact opposite of what the admin wants

Author: @andreaskaris - the enhancement has been updated to drop this terminology. Please take another pass if you can.

two parts - a subway portion (the control-plane) and a self-driving car portion (worker-nodes), we can quickly build the
user's intuition about their responsibilities in the latter part of the journey. For example, leaving earlier to
avoid traffic or staying at a hotel after the subway to optimize their departure for the car ride.

##### Node Update Separation to Improve Risk Mitigation Strategies
With any cluster update, there is risk --  software is changing and even subtle differences in behavior can cause
issues given an unlucky combination of factors. Teams responsible for cluster operations are familiar with these
risks and owe it to their stakeholders to minimize them where possible.

The current, fully self-managed, update process makes one obvious risk mitigation strategy
a relatively advanced strategy to employ: only updating the control-plane and leaving worker-nodes as-is.
It is possible by pausing machine config pools, but this is certainly not an intuitive step for users. Farther back 
in OpenShift 4's history, the strategy was not even safe to perform since it could lead to worker-node 

> certificates to expiring. 

Reviewer 10: Not a native speaker, but:
"since it could lead to worker-node  certificates to expiring. "   to ... to ... sounds strange

outside well planned time windows. 

It could be argued that rigorous and time sensitive management of OpenShift API resources 
(e.g. ClusterVersion, MachineConfigPool, HostedCluster, NodePool, etc.) could prevent
unplanned material changes, but Change Management / Maintenance Schedules introduce higher level, platform native, and 
intuitive guard rails. For example, consider the common pattern of a gitops configured OpenShift cluster.
If a user wants to introduce a change to a MachineConfig, it is simple to merge a change to the
resource without appreciating the fact that it will trigger a rolling reboot of nodes in the cluster.

Trying to merge this change at a particular time of day and/or trying to pause and unpause a 
MachineConfigPool to limit the impact of that merge to a particular time window requires
significant forethought by the user. Even with that forethought, if an enterprise wants 
changes to only be applied during weekends, additional custom mechanics would need
to be employed to ensure the change merged during the weekend without needing someone present.
Even this approach is unavailable to our managed services customers who are restricted

> from modifying machine config pool directly.

Reviewer 10: machine config pools

  # 0 if outside of a permissive window.
  # nil if changes are permitted indefinitely or policy not "Ready".
  permissiveRemaining: 1h4m3s

  # nil if within a permissive window or policy not "Ready".
  lastPermissiveDate: <datetime>

  conditions:
  # If a [Hosted]ChangeManagementPolicy has not calculated yet, it will not
  # have Ready=True. Resources referencing a ChangeManagementPolicy must
  # interpret Ready=False as a Restrictive policy until it is Ready=True.
  - type: Ready
    status: "True"
    reason: "AsExpected"
  # Indicates whether the policy is in a permissive state.
  # Must be False while not "Ready".
  # Message must provide detailed reason when False.
  - type: ChangesRestricted
    status: "True"
    reason: "MaintenanceSchedule"
    message: "Details on why..."
```

### Change Management Strategies

#### Maintenance Schedule Strategy
The strategy is configured by specifying a recurrence rule, identifying permissive dates during which material changes can be
initiated. The cluster lifecycle administrator can also exclude specific date ranges, during which 
the policy will request material changes to be restricted.

> #### Restrictive Strategy

Author: Great points. Countdowns were intended for metrics and I just added them to status because they were already calculated. Dates make more sense for etcd.

```yaml
  behavior:
    current:
      state: ChangesPaused
      # When the state started
      startTime: <datetime>
      endTime: <datetime>  # nil if not expected to change
      reason: 'human readable..'
    next:  # next must not be nil if current.endTime is set.
      state: ChangesUnpaused
      startTime: <datetime>
      endTime: <datetime>
      reason: 'human readable..'
    history:  # Includes up to 5 of the last transitions
      - strategy: MaintenanceSchedule
        state: ChangesUnpaused
        startTime: <datetime>
        endTime: <datetime>
      - strategy: MaintenanceSchedule
        mode: ChangesPaused
        startTime: <datetime>
        endTime: <datetime>
```

> #### Restrictive Strategy

Reviewer 7: That would make sense to me, so we can add an API validation for the link you have between `next` and `current.endTime` to try and avoid bugs too

- Service Delivery will reserve the right to override this policy for emergency corrective actions.
- Service Delivery should constrain permit & exclude configurations based on their internal policies. 
  For example, customers may be forced to enable permissive windows which amount to at least 6 hours a month.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

#### ChangeManagement Stanza
The `spec.changeManagement` stanza will be introduced into ClusterVersion and MachineConfigPool (for standalone profiles)
and HostedCluster and NodePool (for HCP profiles).

#### MaintenanceSchedule Strategy Configuration

When a `[Hosted]ChangeManagementPolicy` is defined to use the `MaintenanceSchedule` strategy,
a `maintenanceSchedule` stanza should also be provided to configure the strategy
(if it is not, the policy is functionally identical to `Restrictive`).

```yaml
kind: ChanageManagementPolicy
spec:
  strategy: MaintenanceSchedule
 
  maintenanceSchedule:

    # Specifies a reoccurring permissive window. 
    permit:  
      
      # If null, all dates are permitted and only exclude constrains permissive windows.

>       recurrence: 

Reviewer 7: Is there every likely to be a scenario where you cannot express the combination of dates you want, to a point where we might need multiple recurrences? (ie should this be a list?)

Scanning the API below, I'm struggling to think of one

Author: With sufficiently complex requirements, I would expect a customer to directly manage a ChangeManagementPolicy -- toggling it from permissive to restrictive. So there is an escape valve.

          by: Day | Date
          date:
            datesOfMonth: 
            - <int> # List of dates 0 < x < 32
            interval: <int> # How many months should pass before the next occurrence 0 < x < 12
          day:
            days:
            - weekOfMonth: First | Second | Third | Fourth | Fifth | Last
              dayOfWeek: Monday | Tuesday | Wednesday | ... | Sunday
            interval: <int> # How many months should pass before the next occurrence 0 < x < 12

        # Required when frequency=Yearly
        yearly:
          # "by" is a discriminant for the unioned types which follow.
          by: Day | Date
          date:
            datesOfMonth: 
            - <int> # List of dates 0 < x < 32
            month: January | February | ... | December
          day:
            days:
            - weekOfMonth: First | Second | Third | Fourth | Fifth | Last
              dayOfWeek: Monday | Tuesday | Wednesday | ... | Sunday
            month: January | February | ... | December
      
      # Given the identification of a date by a recurrence rule, at what time (always UTC) can the 
      # permissive window begin. "00:00" if unset.

>       startTime: <time-of-day|null>

Reviewer 7: We will validate that this is a valid time in hours and minutes? We can use a regex for this I think

      
      # Given the identification of a date by a recurrence rule, after what offset from the startTime should
      # the permissive window close. This can create permissive windows within days that are not
      # identified in the rule. For example, if "weekly on Saturday" is specified as a rule,
      # startTime="20:00", duration="8h" would permit material change initiation starting
      # each Saturday at 8pm and continuing through Sunday 4am (all times are UTC). The default
      # duration is 24:00-startTime (i.e. to the end of the day).

>       duration: <duration|null>

Reviewer 7: Given API conventions suggest that durations are difficult, perhaps we want to consider this to be a `durationMinutes` and be an `int32`. Will want to double check other APIs across openshift before we make a decision

>       duration: <duration|null>

Reviewer 7: What would you set as a minimum/maximum of this field?

Author: I didn't have any limits in mind. Tailoring a minimum doesn't have much utility as any initiated change gets to complete, even if this duration is small.
"0m" could be confusing, but if we can't easily reject variants of 0, I'd accept it creating a minimal period of unpaused.

Reviewer 7: Certainly I'd want to make sure that validation rejects negative values if the go type supports those. 

I don't think there's any special value to the zero value is there? I believe when omitted this acts as `24h` right? So we could block the zero value and assume that an omitted value means 24h. We wouldn't want `0` to mean unlimited since that would make the purpose of the schedule rather moot.

I think that works

Out of interest, if we followed API guidelines and avoided duration formats. Would you see this working as `durationHours` where that is an integer number of hours? Is there a use case for fractional hour durations?

      
    
    # Excluded date ranges override recurrence rule selections.
    exclude:
    # Dates should be specified in YYYY-MM-DD. Each date is excluded from 00:00 UTC for 24 hours.
    - fromDate: <date>
      # Non-inclusive until. If null, until defaults to the day after from (meaning a single day exclusion).
      untilDate: <date|null>
      # Provide additional detail for status when the cluster is within an exclusion period.
      reason: Optional human readable which will be included in status description.
```

**Recurrence Rule Interpretation**
The recurrence schema allows users to express recurring intervals of time without specifying start dates. For example:

```yaml
# Permit every 5th day
daily:
  interval: 5
```

A fixed start date must be assumed in order to calculate a deterministic set of days on which to permit
change. Such rules will be evaluated with a starting date of Jan 1st, 1970 00:00Z. 

If no `startTime` or `duration` is specified, any day selected by the recurrence rule will suggest a

> permissive 24h window unless a date is in the `exclude` ranges.

Reviewer 7: If I specify to start at 10:00 and have a 48h duration, is that valid? Can windows cross the day boundary?

Author: Yes

Author: There is an example in the duration field comment:
```
#  ... startTime="20:00", duration="8h" would permit material change initiation starting
#  each Saturday at 8pm and continuing through Sunday 4am ...
```

Changes that are not allowed to be initiated due to a change management policy will be 
called "pending". Controllers responsible for initiating pending changes will await a permissive window 
according to each resource's relevant `changeManagement` configuration.

In additional to "policies", different resource kinds may offer additional knobs in their `changeManagement`
stanzas to provide cluster lifecycle administrators additional control over the exact nature of 
the changes desired by the resource's associated controller. For example, in `MachineConfigPool`'s 
`changeManagement` stanza, a cluster lifecycle administrator will be able to (optionally) specify the 
exact rendered configuration the controller should be working towards (during the next permissive window) vs
the traditional OpenShift model where the "latest" rendered configuration is always the destination. 

### ChangeManagementPolicy Resource

```yaml
kind: ChangeManagementPolicy
metdata:
  # ChangeManagementPolicies are namespaced resources. They will normally reside in the 
  # namespace associated with the controller initiating material changes. 

>   # For example, in Standalone namespace/openshift-machine-config for the MCO and 

Reviewer 4: nit: there's no `openshift-machine-config` namespace; all the MCO components are in `openshift-machine-config-operator`.  E.g. in [a 4.17.0-ec.1 CI run][1]:

```console
$ curl -s https://gcsweb-ci.apps.ci.l2s4.p1.openshiftapps.com/gcs/test-platform-results/logs/periodic-ci-openshift-release-master-nightly-4.17-e2e-aws-ovn-serial/1806673110347288576/artifacts/e2e-aws-ovn-serial/gather-extra/artifacts/namespaces.json | jq -r '.items[].metadata.name' | grep -1 machine-config
openshift-machine-api
openshift-machine-config-operator
openshift-marketplace
```

[1]: https://prow.ci.openshift.org/view/gs/test-platform-results/logs/periodic-ci-openshift-release-master-nightly-4.17-e2e-aws-ovn-serial/1806673110347288576

Author: Thanks @wking - update in next push.

### Resources Supporting Change Management

Resources which support a reference to a `ChangeManagementPolicy` are said to support change management.
Resources which support change management will implement a `spec.changeManagement` stanza. These stanzas
must support AT LEAST the following fields:

#### ChangeManagement Stanzas
```yaml
kind: ClusterVersion|MachineConfigPool|HostedCluster|NodePool
spec:
  changeManagement:
    # If set to "true" or a future date (represented as string), the effective change 
    # management strategy is Disabled and the window is permissive. 
    # Date must be RFC3339.
    # When disabled with this field, all other values of changeManagement are ignored.
    # This field is modeled on HCP's existing HostedCluster.spec.pausedUntil which uses a string. 
    disabledUntil: <datetime|bool>str
    
    # If set to "true" or a future date (represented as string), the strategy will be
    # paused (not permissive) unless overridden by disabledUntil. If paused with this 
    # setting, it overrides the "policy" stanza.
    # Date must be RFC3339. 
    # This field is modeled on HCP's existing HostedCluster.spec.pausedUntil which uses a string. 

>     pausedUntil: <datetime|bool>str  

Reviewer 4: With `disabledUntil` as a "I want to touch this despite the lack of formal maintenance window" access hatch, I think it makes sense to have that one down on the covered resource in `changeManagement`.  But I'm less clear on why `pausedUntil`'s "despite the usual maintenance window, I have reasons to want to go slowly for a bit" would be down in `changeManagement`.  Maybe `pausedUntil` belongs up on `ChangeManagementPolicy`?  Or maybe `exclude` already covers that use case at the `ChangeManagementPolicy` level, and we don't need `pausedUntil` at all?

Author: I wanted `pausedUntil` to be a knob even without a `ChangeManagementPolicy` defined. It is in the resource itself because I believe:
1. It offers a simple way for users to control roll-outs without having to get into the details of creating `ChangeManagementPolicy` definitions. I want them to be able to easily toggle pausing a rollout of an MCP without the rabbit hole of understanding `ChangeManagementPolicy` - that rabbit hole is only worth it for someone who wants a real `MaintenanceSchedule`.
2. Moving `pausedUntil` into `ChangeManagementPolicy ` makes the meaning even more challenging to convey / interpret. For example, how would you interpret "pausedUntil: true" for a `Restrictive` strategy vs a `Permissive` strategy? A paused restrictive strategy sounds like it would be evaluated as permissive. 
3. It permits CLI tools to pause and unpause rollouts regardless of whether an administrator has configured a `ChangeManagementPolicy`. I think this is critical in order to implement verbs like `oc adm update worker-nodes start|stop|pause` and ensure they have MCP granularity.

exact rendered configuration the controller should be working towards (during the next permissive window) vs
the traditional OpenShift model where the "latest" rendered configuration is always the destination. 

### `[Hosted]ChangeManagementPolicy` Resource

```yaml
# HostedChangeManagementPolicy for hosted clusters (referenced by HostedCluster and NodePool)
# ChangeManagementPolicy for internal policies of a c cluster (referenced by CVO and MCP).
kind: "[Hosted]ChangeManagementPolicy"
metadata:

  # Only HostedChangeManagementPolicy are namespaced. This
  # field is NOT present for ChangeManagementPolicy.

>   namespace: openshift-machine-config-operator

Author: Good catch!

  strategy: MaintenanceSchedule
 
  maintenanceSchedule:

    # Specifies a reoccurring permissive window. 
    permit:  
      
      # If null, all dates are permitted and only exclude constrains permissive windows.
      recurrence: 
        # "frequency" is a discriminant for the unioned types which follow.
        frequency: Yearly | Monthly | Weekly | Daily
        
        # Required when frequency=Daily
        daily:
          interval: <int> # How many days should pass before the next occurrence 0 < x < 731

        # Required when frequency=Weekly
        weekly:

>           days: 

Author: I like it!

          - Monday
          - Tuesday
          - Wednesday
          interval: <int> # How many weeks should pass before the next occurrence 0 < x < 27

        # Required when frequency=Monthly
        monthly:
          # "by" is a discriminant for the unioned types which follow.
          by: Day | Date
          date:

>             dates: 

Reviewer 7: Maybe `datesOfMonth`?

            - <int> # List of dates 0 < x < 32
            interval: <int> # How many months should pass before the next occurrence 0 < x < 12
          day:
            days:
            - week: First | Second | Third | Fourth | Fifth | Last

>               day: Monday | Tuesday | Wednesday | ... | Sunday

Reviewer 7: On another thread, mentioned this may be confusing, perhaps
```
day:
  on:
  - weekOfMonth: ...
    dayOfWeek: ...
```
